The use of secondary metabolites of rice to control pests has become a research hotspot, but little is known about the mechanism of rice self-resistance. In this study, metabolomics analysis was performed on two groups of rice (T1, with insect pests; T2, without pests), indicating that fatty acids, alkaloids, and phenolic acids were significantly up-regulated in T1. The up-regulated metabolites (p-value < 0.1) were enriched in linoleic acid metabolism, terpene, piperidine, and pyridine alkaloid biosynthesis, α-linolenic acid metabolism, and tryptophan metabolism. Six significantly up-regulated differential metabolites in T1 were screened out: N-trans-feruloyl-3-methoxytyramine (1), N-trans-feruloyltyramine (2), N-trans-p-coumaroyltyramine (3), N-cis-feruloyltyramine (4), N-phenylacetyl-L-glutamine (5), and benzamide (6). The insect growth inhibitory activities of these six different metabolites were determined, and the results show that compound 1 had the highest activity, which significantly inhibited the growth of Chilo suppressalis by 59.63%. Compounds 2–4 also showed a good inhibitory effect on the growth of Chilo suppressalis, while the other compounds had no significant effect. RNA-seq analyses showed that larval exposure to compound 1 up-regulated the genes that were significantly enriched in ribosome biogenesis in eukaryotes, the cell cycle, ribosomes, and other pathways. The down-regulated genes were significantly enriched in metabolic pathways, oxidative phosphorylation, the citrate cycle (TCA cycle), and other pathways. Eighteen up-regulated genes and fifteen down-regulated genes from the above significantly enriched pathways were screened out and verified by real-time quantitative PCR. The activities of detoxification enzymes (glutathione S-transferase (GST); UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT); and carboxylesterase (CarE)) under larval exposure to compound 1 were measured, which indicated that the activity of GST was significantly inhibited by compound 1, while the activities of the UGT and CarE enzymes did not significantly change. As determined by UPLC-MS, the contents of compound 1 in the T1 and T2 groups were 8.55 ng/g and 0.53 ng/g, respectively, which indicated that pest insects significantly induced the synthesis of compound 1. Compound 1 may enhance rice insect resistance by inhibiting the detoxification enzyme activity and metabolism of Chilo suppressalis, as well as promoting cell proliferation to affect its normal growth and development process. The chemical–ecological mechanism of the insect resistance of rice is preliminarily clarified in this paper.