F-box proteins share the F-box domain to connect substrates of E3 SCF ubiquitin RING ligases through the adaptor Skp1/A to Cul1/A scaffolds. F-box protein Fbx15 is part of the general stress response of the human pathogenic mold Aspergillus fumigatus. Oxidative stress induces a transient peak of fbx15 expression, resulting in 3x elevated Fbx15 protein levels. During non-stress conditions Fbx15 is phosphorylated and F-box mediated interaction with SkpA preferentially happens in smaller subpopulations in the cytoplasm. The F-box of Fbx15 is required for an appropriate oxidative stress response, which results in rapid dephosphorylation of Fbx15 and a shift of the cellular interaction with SkpA to the nucleus. Fbx15 binds SsnF/Ssn6 as part of the RcoA/Tup1-SsnF/Ssn6 co-repressor and is required for its correct nuclear localization. Dephosphorylated Fbx15 prevents SsnF/Ssn6 nuclear localization and results in the derepression of gliotoxin gene expression. fbx15 deletion mutants are unable to infect immunocompromised mice in a model for invasive aspergillosis. Fbx15 has a novel dual molecular function by controlling transcriptional repression and being part of SCF E3 ubiquitin ligases, which is essential for stress response, gliotoxin production and virulence in the opportunistic human pathogen A. fumigatus. Author Summary The opportunistic human fungal pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus is the most prevalent cause for severe fungal infections in immunocompromised hosts. A major virulence factor of A. fumigatus is its ability to rapidly adapt to host conditions during infection. The rapid response to environmental changes underlies a well-balanced system of production and degradation of proteins. The degradation of specific target proteins is mediated by ubiquitin-protein ligases (E3), which mark their target proteins with ubiquitin for proteasomal degradation. Multisubunit SCF Cullin1 Ring ligases (CRL) are E3 ligases where the F-box subunit functions as a substrate-specificity determining adaptor. A comprehensive control of protein production includes global co-repressors as the conserved Ssn6(SsnF)-Tup1(RcoA) complex, which reduces transcription on multiple levels. We have identified a novel connection between protein degradation and synthesis through an F-box protein. Fbx15 can be incorporated into SCF E3 ubiquitin ligases and controls upon stress the nuclear localization of the SsnF. Fbx15 plays a critical role for A. fumigatus adaptation and is essential for virulence in a murine infection model. Fbx15 is a fungal-specific protein and therefore a potential target for future drug development.