Background Members of the genus Bacillus are important plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria that serve as biocontrol agents. Bacillus paralicheniformis MDJK30 is a PGPR isolated from the peony rhizosphere and can suppress plant-pathogenic bacteria and fungi. To further uncover the genetic mechanism of the plant growth-promoting traits of MDJK30 and its closely related strains, we used comparative genomics to provide insights into the genetic diversity and evolutionary relationship between B. paralicheniformis and B. licheniformis. Results A comparative genomics analysis based on B. paralicheniformis MDJK30 and 55 other previously reported Bacillus strains was performed. The evolutionary position of MDJK30 and the evolutionary relationship between B. paralicheniformis and B. licheniformis were evaluated by studying the phylogeny of the core genomes, a population structure analysis and ANI results. Comparative genomic analysis revealed various features of B. paralicheniformis that contribute to its commensal lifestyle in the rhizosphere, including an opening pan genome, a diversity of transport and the metabolism of the carbohydrates and amino acids. There are notable differences in the numbers and locations of the insertion sequences, prophages, genomic islands and secondary metabolic synthase operons between B. paralicheniformis and B. licheniformis. In particular, we found most gene clusters of Fengycin, Bacitracin and Lantipeptide were only present in B. paralicheniformis and were obtained by horizontal gene transfer (HGT), and these clusters may be used as genetic markers for distinguishing B. paralicheniformis and B. licheniformis. Conclusions This study reveals that MDJK30 and the other strains of lineage paralicheniformis present plant growth-promoting traits at the genetic level and can be developed and commercially formulated in agriculture as PGPR. Core genome phylogenies and population structure analysis has proven to be a powerful tool for differentiating B. paralicheniformis and B. licheniformis. Comparative genomic analyses illustrate the genetic differences between the paralicheniformis-licheniformis group with respect to rhizosphere adaptation. Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (10.1186/s12864-019-5646-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.