Plants often generate secondary metabolites as defense mechanisms against parasites. Although some fungi may potentially overcome the barrier presented by antimicrobial compounds, only a limited number of examples and molecular mechanisms of resistance have been reported. Here, we found an Aglaia plant-parasitizing fungus that overcomes the toxicity of rocaglates, which are translation inhibitors synthesized by the plant, through an amino acid substitution in a eukaryotic translation initiation factor (eIF). De novo transcriptome assembly revealed that the fungus belongs to the Ophiocordyceps genus and that its eIF4A, a molecular target of rocaglates, harbors an amino acid substitution critical for rocaglate binding. Ribosome profiling harnessing a cucumber-infecting fungus, Colletotrichum orbiculare, demonstrated that the translational inhibitory effects of rocaglates were largely attenuated by the mutation found in the Aglaia parasite. The engineered C. orbiculare showed a survival advantage on cucumber plants with rocaglates. Our study exemplifies a plant–fungus tug-of-war centered on secondary metabolites produced by host plants. eLife digest Although plants may seem like passive creatures, they are in fact engaged in a constant battle against the parasitic fungi that attack them. To combat these fungal foes, plants produce small molecules that act like chemical weapons and kill the parasite. However, the fungi sometimes fight back, often by developing enzymes that can break down the deadly chemicals into harmless products. One class of anti-fungal molecules that has drawn great interest is rocaglates, as they show promise as treatments for cancer and COVID-19. Rocaglates are produced by plants in the Aglaia family and work by targeting the fungal molecule eIF4A which is fundamental for synthesizing proteins. Since proteins perform most of the chemistry necessary for life, one might think that rocaglates could ward off any fungus. But Chen et al. discovered there is in fact a species of fungi that can evade this powerful defense mechanism. After seeing this new-found fungal species successfully growing on Aglaia plants, Chen et al. set out to find how it is able to protect itself from rocoglates. Genetic analysis of the fungus revealed that its eIF4A contained a single mutation that ‘blocked’ rocaglates from interacting with it. Chen et al. confirmed this effect by engineering a second fungal species (which infects cucumber plants) so that its elF4A protein contained the mutation found in the new fungus. Fungi with the mutated eIF4A thrived on cucumber leaves treated with a chemical derived from rocaglates, whereas fungi with the non-mutated version were less successful. These results shed new light on the constant ‘arms race’ between plants and their fungal parasites, with each side evolving more sophisticated ways to overcome the other’s defenses. Chen et al. hope that identifying the new rocaglate-resistant eIF4A mutation will help guide the development and use of any therapies based on rocaglates. Further work investigating how often the mutation occurs in humans will also be important for determining how effective these therapies will be.