ABSTRACT Antibiotic-producing microorganisms usually require one or more self-resistance determinants to survive antibiotic production. The effectors of these mechanisms are proteins that inactivate the antibiotic, facilitate its transport, or modify the target to render it insensitive to the molecule. Streptomyces bacteria biosynthesize various bioactive natural products and possess resistance systems for most metabolites, which are coregulated with antibiotic biosynthesis genes. Streptomyces olindensis strain DAUFPE 5622 produces the antitumor antibiotic cosmomycin D (COSD), a member of the anthracycline family. In this study, we propose three self-resistance mechanisms, anchored or based in the COSD biosynthetic gene cluster. These include cosIJ (an ABC transporter), cosU (a UvrA class IIa protein), and a new self-resistance mechanism encoded by cosP, which shows response against peroxides by the enzyme mycothiol peroxidase (MPx). Activity-based investigations of MPx and its mutant enzyme confirmed peroxidation during the production of COSD. Overexpression of the ABC transporter, the UvrA class IIa protein, and the MPx led to an effective response against toxic anthracyclines, such as cosmomycins. Our findings help to understand how thiol peroxidases play an antioxidant role in the anthracycline producer S. olindensis DAUFPE 5622, a mechanism which has been reported for neoplastic cells that are resistant to doxorubicin (DOX). IMPORTANCE Anthracycline compounds are DNA intercalating agents widely used in cancer chemotherapeutic protocols. This work focused on the self-resistance mechanisms developed by the cosmomycin-producing bacterium Streptomyces olindensis. Our findings showed that cysteine peroxidases, such as mycothiol peroxidase, encoded by the gene cosP, protected S. olindensis against peroxidation during cosmomycin production. This observation can contribute to much better understanding of resistance both in the producers, eventually enhancing production, and in some tumoral cell lines.