Abstract Chaetoglobosin A is a complex macrocyclic alkaloid with potent antimycotic, antiparasitic and antitumor properties. However, the low output and high cost of chaetoglobosin A biosynthesis have hampered the application and commercialization of chaetoglobosin A in agriculture and biomedicine. Here, the CgMfs1 gene, which encodes the major facilitator superfamily secondary transporter, was identified based on bioinformatics analysis, and an intensive study of its effects on chaetoglobosin A biosynthesis and secretion was performed using CgMfs1‐silencing and CgMfs1‐overexpression strategies. Inactivation of CgMfs1 caused a notable decrease in chaetoglobosin A yield from 58.66 mg/L to 19.95 mg/L (MFS1–3) and 17.13 mg/L (MFS1–4). The use of an efficient expression plasmid in Chaetomium globosum W7 to generate the overexpression mutant OEX13 resulted in the highest chaetoglobosin A increase to 298.77 mg/L. Interestingly, the transcription level of the polyketide synthase gene significantly fluctuated with the change in CgMfs1, confirming that the predicted efflux gene CgMfs1 could play a crucial role in chaetoglobosin A transportation. Effective efflux of chaetoglobosin A could possibly alleviate feedback inhibition, resulting in notable increase in the expression of the polyketide synthase gene. Furthermore, we utilized cornstalk as the fermentation substrate to produce chaetoglobosin A, and scanning electron microscopy and Fourier transform‐infrared spectroscopy revealed that the strain OEX13 could well degrade cornstalk, presenting significant increases in the chaetoglobosin A yield, when compared with that produced by the wild‐type strain (from 40.32 to 191.90 mg/L). Thus, this research provides a novel analogous engineering strategy for the construction of high‐yielding strain and offers new insight into large‐scale chaetoglobosin A production. In this work, a gene named as CgMfs1, which encodes the major facilitator superfamily secondary transporter, has been identified based on the bioinformatics analysis. CgMfs1‐silencing and CgMfs1‐overexpression strategies have been developed to intensive study of its effects on chaetoglobosin A biosynthesis and secretion. In addition, our attempt to employ the optimal overexpression mutant OEX13 to produce chaetoglobosin A and cornstalk was used as the unique substrate. This research provided a new insight for studying the secondary metabolites of the genus of Chaetomium. More importantly, cornstalk resources to generate bioactive substances, which with the high economic value, will become a new direction of future development.