Introduction Recent years have witnessed an exponential increase in data accumulation across all fields, ushering us into the era of big data. Research on naturally occurring organic compounds, typically referred to as natural products, is no exception to this global trend1,2. Traditional methods used to isolate natural products often lead to the rediscovery of known compounds, and therefore, scientists are now required to discover hidden natural products or synthesize their analogues using alternative strategies. Leveraging big data presents a promising solution to this problem. The rapid accumulation of microbial genome sequence data has revealed that microbial genomes harbor more natural product biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) than one can predict based on the number of metabolites produced under standard laboratory cultivation conditions3–5. Thus, the activation and characterization of these silent or orphan BGCs present in microbial genomes can lead to the discovery of previously undescribed natural products. A method known as genome mining has been demonstrated as useful for discovering unexploited metabolites in recent decades6–8. However, a major challenge in the field of genome mining is determining how to prioritize BGCs identified in available genome sequence data for the efficient discovery of untapped natural products. Fungi are prolific producers of natural products with diverse molecular structures and biological activities, establishing them as promising sources of unexplored metabolites. To facilitate genome mining in fungi, several bioinformatic tools, such as antiSMASH9, SMURF10, DeepBGC11, and TOUCAN12, can be employed to detect BGCs in a specific fungal genome. Among the available tools, antiSMASH has gained the most popularity, possibly because of its user-friendly online platform and versatile functions. However, some challenges have been encountered while using antiSMASH for BGC detection and genome mining. First, antiSMASH classifies many genes as other genes, even when they encode a biosynthetic enzyme. For example, when antiSMASH (version 7.0.0) was employed to analyze the BGC of the fungal meroterpenoid novofumigatonin13, a hybrid molecule of polyketide and terpenoid origin, it categorized 6 out of 13 genes as other genes. This may be because some of these genes lacked a detectable Pfam domain14 (Supplementary Fig. 1). Moreover, one of these six overlooked genes encodes the terpene cyclase NvfL, which has widely distributed homologues in natural product pathways15. Thus, although antiSMASH should theoretically categorize this BGC as “T1PKS, terpene” (type I polyketide synthase + terpene synthase), it recognized only T1PKS. In addition, these enzymes without a detectable protein domain (hereafter termed domainless enzymes) included the α-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase NvfI and the methyltransferase NvfJ, indicating that antiSMASH failed to recognize various biosynthetic proteins. Furthermore, although antiSMASH and the other aforementioned tools can be used to extract all possible BGCs from a genome sequence, they do not facilitate the selective extraction of BGCs with a desired or specific feature. Thus, users need to select BGCs based on the criteria set for subsequent wet lab experiments. In this study, we aimed to overcome these challenges by developing a widely applicable genome mining methodology for the rapid discovery of unexplored natural products and biosynthetic mechanisms.