Introduction Most of the currently used antibiotics were discovered during the “golden era of antibiotic discovery” spanning from the 1940s and 1960s (Lewis, 2013). Although novel types of antibiotics have rarely been discovered since that period, the demand for novel antibiotics has increased to address the escalating threat posed by multi-drug-resistant pathogens (Boucher et al., 2009). The genus Streptomyces, consisting of a large number of species, holds significance as a major antibiotic producer. Approximately two-thirds of the clinically used antibiotics have been discovered in this genus. In addition, their secondary metabolites often possess additional beneficial activities related to medical, agricultural, and chemical applications, such as antitumorals and anthelmintics (Arcamone et al., 1969; Burg et al., 1979). As an abundant reservoir of secondary metabolites, a single Streptomyces species is expected to encode approximately 30 secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters (smBGCs) in its genome. However, the characterization of the products synthesized from many of the smBGCs has been limited (Lee et al., 2020a). Considering the abundance of species within the Streptomyces genus and the ease of isolating novel species, the discovery of at least tens of thousands of novel smBGCs is anticipated, providing a potential breakthrough in meeting the growing demand for novel antibiotics that are effective against multidrug-resistant pathogens (Khattab et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2020b). Although genome mining of streptomycetes reveals the existence of numerous unexplored bioactive compounds in the genomes, the actual discovery of novel secondary metabolites is far behind their potential, as their secondary metabolism undergoes complex regulation, and smBGCs often remain silent under laboratory culture conditions (Craney et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2020c). Therefore, there is an urgent need to activate silent smBGCs to fully harness the genomic potential of Streptomyces. Multiple approaches have been used to activate silent smBGCs in Streptomyces. One such approach involves indirectly activating smBGCs by mimicking the environmental signals required for activation. For example, the one strain–many compound approach diversifies cultivation parameters, including media composition, aeration, temperature, and enzyme inhibitors, for a single strain to elicit secondary metabolism (Bode et al., 2002). Cocultivation with other organisms can also activate secondary metabolism (Marmann et al., 2014). However, these indirect approaches may result in the repetitive activation of the same smBGC in each trial. In addition, further efforts are required to identify the smBGCs encoded in the genome responsible for the biosynthesis of newly produced secondary metabolites. Targeted activation of uncharacterized smBGCs is the preferred approach for the discovery of novel secondary metabolites, which involves engineering cluster-situated regulators, refactoring the target smBGC, and/or heterologous expression of the target smBGC (Baral et al., 2018). Efficient genetic manipulation tools are required for targeted smBGC activation. Fortunately, efficient clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated (Cas)-mediated genome editing tools are available for Streptomyces, which have promoted the discovery of secondary metabolites (Tong et al., 2020). In this review, the current applications of the CRISPR/Cas system in Streptomyces are briefly described and discuss the potential of the CRISPR/Cas system to boost natural product discovery.