1. Introduction Alicyclobacillus spp. are common, spoiling, nonpathogenic, Gram (+), spore-forming, thermo-acidophilic bacteria. They are found in various natural and anthropogenic environments, such as soils, hot springs, mine waters, different fruits, juices, and beverages, as they have the ability to survive in acidic, high temperature, and high-pressure conditions [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10] This genus includes species that produce off-flavors and antiseptic-, smoky-, and medicinal-tasting compounds, such as guaiacol and halophenols, 2,6-dibromophenol, and 2,6-dichlorophenol [1,3,11]. Currently, 29 species of Alicyclobacillus are known [4,6,11], with 9 of them reported to produce guaiacol: A. acidophilus, A. acidoterrestris, A. daucy, A. herbarius, A. cycloheptanicus, A. pomorum, A. contaminans, some strains of A. hesperidum, and (as recently reported) A. fastidiosus [11]. Alicyclobacillus spp. pose a significant concern for the food and beverage industry due to their potential to cause substantial economic losses. Consequently, most studies have focused on identifying and characterizing their growth, germination, behavior, adaptation, metabolite production, and control measures [1,2,3,11,12,13,14,15,16]. Agricultural fields and fertilized orchards may serve as hotspots for the duplication of genes that confer drug resistance, facilitating their transfer to soil bacteria and, subsequently, the food chain. This pathway could allow resistance determinants to reach the human body, making it crucial to uncover potential antibiotic resistance (AR) transmission pathways and the critical mechanisms involved in antibiotic resistance. Limited information is available regarding antibiotic susceptibility among Alicyclobacillus spp. Aulitto et al. [2] identified the brcC gene involved in bacitracin resistance in two A. mali genomes. They also reported that A. mali FL18 exhibited resistance to ampicillin, bacitracin, kanamycin, streptomycin, erythromycin, ciprofloxacin, and vancomycin. Based on genomic analysis, they hypothesized that such a broad spectrum of antibiotic resistance is associated with the expression of multiple multidrug efflux transporters. The potential for food and beverages to act as vectors for the transfer of antibiotic resistance genes is a growing health concern [17,18]. The removal of antibiotics from the market in accordance with Regulation (EC) N 1831/2003 has underscored the need to reduce antimicrobial resistance in the food chain [18]. Microorganisms in food and beverages should not be a source of drug resistance to consumers. Resistance to antimicrobial agents can be intrinsic, as natural phenotypic traits typical of all strains of all species, or acquired through additional genes carried on mobile genetic elements (plasmids or transposons) or mutations of indigenous genes [17,19]. One of the key mechanisms for the formation of new genes, including antibiotic resistance genes, is amplification and subsequent mutations, as shown for trimethoprim [20], sulfonamides [21], and β-lactams [22]. Antibiotic resistance predates the 20th-century “antibiotic era”. Prokaryotic antibiotic resistance genes have been found in environments minimally affected by human activity. For instance, the Sul2–strA–strB gene cluster was identified in a 1200- to 1400-year-old Antarctic ice core sample [23]; genes conferring resistance to β-lactams, tetracycline, and glycopeptides were found in 30,000-year-old Beringian permafrost sediments [24]. Additionally, aminoglycosides, β-lactams, fluoroquinolones, and macrolide resistance factors were isolated from Tibetan glacial lake sediments and soil [25]. Genes encoding resistance to standard antibiotics in these samples were associated with efflux pumps, distinct from the modern antibiotic resistome. The natural source of AR genes is environmental bacteria, especially Actinomycetota [26,27,28]. Since metabolic pathways for antibiotic synthesis are estimated to be 200 to 500 million years old, antibiotic resistance must be of similar age to counterbalance the antibiotic effects [29,30,31]. Intrinsic resistance presents minimal potential for horizontal spread among microorganisms. In contrast, acquired resistance poses a greater risk for horizontal dissemination, enabling rapid inactivation of selected antibiotics through degradation, export from the cell via efflux systems, or alteration of the antibiotic’s target site [19]. However, the distinction between intrinsic and acquired resistance may be blurred; due to the action of transposases or integrases, resistance factors may transfer between chromosomes to plasmids, and the ability to transmit genes horizontally can be gained or lost. An additional important factor in the evolution and spread of antibiotic resistance is that if the genes associated with antibiotic resistance are located on high-copy-number plasmids, this type of amplification enables faster evolution and increased resistance to the agent. Bacteria in heterogeneous environments can develop antibiotic resistance faster than bacteria living in homogeneous environments, especially when the potential relationship between AR and flagella and chemotaxis can be found through efflux mechanisms, biofilm formation, or mobile genetic elements [32]. Piskovsky et al., 2023, suggest that bacterial motility can facilitate dispersal on the surface, which may lead to greater nutrient availability and potentially higher antibiotic resistance. Bacterial swarming is the best-understood relationship between cell motility and the ability of bacteria to cope with antibiotics. Swarming is a form of group motility on surfaces where cells are particularly resistant to antibiotic stress. Reduced exposure of individual cells to antibiotics, leads to tolerance of antibiotics. In addition to swarming, other connections between bacterial motility and the antibiotic landscape have been reported. In particular, antibiotics have been shown to induce motor responses. However, it is not known what impact they have on the evolution of antibiotic resistance. The FEEDAP Panel (The Panel on Additives and Products or Substances used in Animal Feed) defines the microbiological breakpoints to distinguish resistant from susceptible strains [17]. Microbiological cut-off values are established by examining the distribution of MIC values of selected antimicrobials in bacterial populations of a single species or genus. These cut-off values are used to evaluate microbial products for the presence of antimicrobial resistance. Genetic investigations are required to further determine the nature of resistance, especially when limited or no information on the MIC distribution within the species is known, as is true of Alicyclobacillus spp. This work aims to deepen the understanding of the genetic determinants associated with antibiotic resistance in three guaiacol-producing Alicyclobacillus spp. strains. To achieve this, the three strains were sequenced to annotate relevant regions. Additionally, loci involved in functional characteristics were identified using comprehensive bioinformatic analyses, focusing on the presence of prophage regions, mobile elements, and plasmids. Finally, clusters for the production of metabolites involved in the spoilage phenotype were also recognized, which may be significant for comparative and functional genome analysis within this group of food spoilage bacteria.