Introduction Early trends in breast cancer research focused on killing tumor cells directly, bringing radiotherapy and chemotherapy into general use. However, both of them do not localize adequately to the tumor site, and the accidental destruction of normal tissues and systems limits the clinical benefit of these techniques and even hinders a good prognosis. Thus, there is no doubt that the development of immunotherapy provided a tremendous infusion of hope to breast cancer patients with hormone receptor-positive and HER2+ breast cancer. Currently, chemotherapy remains the mainstream treatment method for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), which accounts for over 15–20% of breast cancer cases without the classical hormone receptor (HR) and HER2 (Garrido-Castro, Lin & Polyak, 2019). Whatever the choices of times for TNBC chemotherapy, metastases and relapses and drug resistances are more likely to be caused in these patients without proper maintenance therapy as they are throughout other type breast cancers. Moreover, the molecular heterogeneity within TNBC cells should also take on a fairly negative role which lead to a more aggressive disease course and low immune response underlie the poor prognosis of TNBC compared with other molecular types of breast cancer. Thus, the application value of immunotherapy in TNBC is revealed through the investigation of multiple targets. Though there are several types of tumor-infiltrating cells, we mainly discuss the high levels of CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) in breast cancer in this review. A previous systematic review including 13,914 cases of breast cancer confirmed that a median of about 60% and 61% of TNBC and HER2+ cases, respectively, contain CD8+ T cells, compared with only 43% of HR+ breast cancers (Stanton, Adams & Disis, 2016). TNBC and HER2+ breast cancer are considered to have high immunogenicity, which equates to their being slightly hotter from the viewpoint of immunity, although breast cancer in general tends to be cold (Corti, Nicolò & Curigliano, 2021). In addition to the total count of T cell, the density and localization of this kind of immune cell is also crucial to the therapeutic efficacy. Clinical data indicate that a high level of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) is aligned with favorable outcomes and response rates to chemotherapy in solid tumors, with the density of CTLs in the tumor being particularly important (Koh et al., 2017; Nelson et al., 2021; Topalian et al., 2016). These results further indicate that focusing more on CD8+ T cells has extensive prospects for the treatment of HR– breast cancer, especially for TNBC. Furthermore, we can conclude that the infiltration of CTLs is helpful for subsequent evaluations of breast cancer and even determine whether intensive adjuvant therapy or immunotherapy need to be plugged into clinical strategies.