Introduction Doxorubicin is an anthracycline antibiotic, and its analogs include daunorubicin, epirubicin and idarubicin. As a chemical drug, doxorubicin has a broad array of anticancer activities and is used to treat various cancers, especially hemangioma and solid tumors (Mattioli et al. 2023). For most cancers, doxorubicin remains a first-line chemotherapy agent, either alone or in combination (Sritharan and Sivalingam 2021; Turinetto et al. 2023). At present, daunorubicin is produced by fermentation, followed by separation, purification and chemical synthesis to produce doxorubicin. Chemical synthesis requires side chain group protection and deprotection, polluting the environment and having high production costs. In 1969, it was first reported that doxorubicin is produced in S. peucetius ATCC27952 by fermentation (Arcamone et al. 1969). The use of doxorubicin directly obtained by fermentation is limited by the low titer used during fermentation. If a large amount of doxorubicin can be obtained directly by fermentation through a high-yielding strain and by optimizing the fermentation process, this approach will be an environmentally friendly and efficient method. The biosynthetic pathway of doxorubicin can be divided into three main pathways (Gao et al. 2022; Hutchinson and Colombo 1999). The synthesis of ɛ-rhodomycinone is the first pathway involved. Under the action of a type II polyketide synthase (PKS) encoded by the dpsABCDGEFY genes, 12-deoxyacranic acid is synthesized by a multistep reaction with propionyl CoA as the starting unit and malonyl CoA as the extension unit. Then, the ɛ-rhodomycinone aglycone is produced by oxygenase, methyltransferase, cyclization and reductase. The second synthesis pathway of doxorubicin is that of TDP-L-daunosamine. Through a six-step reaction, D-glucose-1-phosphate from the central metabolic pathway is synthesized to produce TDP-L-daunosamine, which involves a cluster of dnm genes, including dnmL, dnmM, dnmU, dnmT, dnmJ, and dnmV. Finally, glycosylation and postmodification of daunorubicin and doxorubicin occur. Rhodomycin-D is produced by ɛ-rhodomycinone and TDP-L-daurosamine through the action of glycosyltransferase. After postmodification (demethylation, decarboxylation and hydroxylation), daunorubicin and doxorubicin are obtained. In the branch pathway, daunorubicin is converted to 13(S)-13-dihydrodaunorubicin via catalysis by the enzyme encoded by the dnrU gene. Moreover, daunorubicin and doxorubicin are converted into acid-sensitive baumycin by the enzymes encoded by the genes dnrH and dnrX, as shown in Additional file: Fig. S1. In S. peucetitus ATCC 27,952, the yield of doxorubicin is low, making its large-scale production difficult and high-cost. To address this problem, several efforts have been made to increase the production of doxorubicin by genetic engineering. Based on the biosynthetic pathway of doxorubicin, its production may be limited by several key enzymes, such as glycosylated genes and a P450 enzyme DoxA. Therefore, they were engineered to increase the fermentation yield of doxorubicin. The overexpression of glycosylated genes has been utilized to increase the fermentation yield of doxorubicin. Malla (Malla et al. 2009) achieved a 5.6-fold increase in doxorubicin production (approximately 10 mg/L) by simultaneously overexpressing the gene glycosyltransferase dnrS/dnrQ and the sugar synthesis pathway gene desIII/desIV. Recently, Zhang (Zhang et al. 2023a) obtained a DoxA mutant, DoxA(P88Y), showed a 56% increase in the conversion efficiency of daunorubicin to doxorubicin. These results indicated that some enzymes are limiting factors in the biosynthetic pathway and their engineering is an important approach to improve doxorubicin production. In addition, it was reported that the synthesis of the secondary metabolite doxorubicin is tightly regulated. The fermentation yield of doxorubicin was increased by disrupting negative regulatory genes and overexpressing positive regulatory genes. Noh(Noh et al. 2010)enhanced the doxorubicin fermentation yield by approximately 35% (approximately 75 mg/L) by disrupting the downregulation of the gene wblA. In addition, the expression of the AfsR homologous regulatory gene (AfsR-p) in S. peucetius ATCC27952 led to a 4-fold increase in doxorubicin production (approximately 80 mg/L) (Parajuli et al. 2005). ParK (Park et al. 2005) increased the fermentation yield of doxorubicin by 30.8-fold (approximately 11 mg/L) through the overexpression of the regulatory gene dnrI in a high-copy-number plasmid combined with the optimization of the medium. Moreover, Malla(Malla et al. 2010a) increased the fermentation yield of doxorubicin by 4.3 times (approximately 7 mg/L) by simultaneously overexpressing the regulatory gene dnrN-dnrI-afsR. However, in all these studies, improving the yield of doxorubicin were focused on wild-type strains with low doxorubicin yields. Therefore, genetic modification of high-yielding strains is important for industrial application. In our previous study, we generated a S. peucetius SIPI-14 strain with significantly improved doxorubicin levels by combining the traditional method of UV and ARTP mutagenesis (Wang et al. 2018). In the present study, a strain with doxorubicin resistance was obtained from SIPI-14 for further genetic modification combined with fermentation medium optimization to significantly improve the yield of doxorubicin, which laid a foundation for the large-scale industrial production of doxorubicin by direct fermentation in the future.