Introduction Lasso peptides are a group of ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides (RiPPs) with a characteristic lariat topology, in which the C-terminal tail threads through the macrolactam ring formed by the N-terminal amino group and the carboxylic acid side chain of an aspartate or a glutamate located at position 7–9 of the core peptide via an isopeptide bond (Hegemann et al., 2015; Martin-Gómez and Tulla-Puche, 2018). The number and position of disulfide linkages are used to categorize lasso peptides into four classes, among which class II is the most frequently encountered and features no disulfide bridge, and the lasso topology is stabilized only by steric interactions above and below the ring (Zhao et al., 2016; Martin-Gómez and Tulla-Puche, 2018; Cheng and Hua, 2020; Hegemann et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021). Generally speaking, the biosynthesis of lasso peptides requires at least three proteins, including a precursor peptide (A), a cysteine protease (B) with homology to transglutaminases, and an adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-dependent macrolactam synthetase (C) homologous to asparagine synthetases (Supplementary Figure S1). Many lasso peptide biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) also contain a fourth gene encoding an ABC-transporter (D), which is responsible for excretion and self-resistance. B genes from actinobacteria and firmicutes are usually split into two genes: B1 encodes the N-terminal RiPP precursor recognition element (RRE) domain with homology to PqqD family proteins, while B2 encodes the C-terminal protease domain that cleaves the leader peptide of the precursor, after which the remanent core peptide is macrolactamized to form the mature lasso peptide (Burkhart et al., 2015; Hegemann et al., 2015; Martin-Gómez and Tulla-Puche, 2018). Beyond the class-defining leader peptide removal and core peptide macrolactamization, nine unique post-translational modifications (PTMs) are reported in total in the biosynthesis of lasso peptides up to now (Duan et al., 2022), among which the (poly)phosphorylation, methylation, hydroxylation, and epimerization are verified to act on the linear precursor peptide ahead of leader peptide removal (Zhu et al., 2016b,c; Su et al., 2019; Feng et al., 2020; Zhang and Seyedsayamdost, 2020). Besides, the B1 proteins were proven to enhance the turnover rates for epimerization and hydroxylation (Feng et al., 2020; Zhang and Seyedsayamdost, 2020), hinting at the dual functions for RREs. Bradymonas sediminis FA350 is a Gram-negative, rod-shaped, and facultatively prey-dependent bacterium isolated from coastal sediments in Weihai, China. Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA gene sequences showed that this strain belongs to a novel bacterial order Bradymonadales and a novel family Bradymonadaceae in the class Deltaproteobacteria (Wang et al., 2015; Mu et al., 2020). Sequencing of the genome sequence of B. sediminis FA350 (accession No. NZ_CP030032.1) and subsequent search for natural products BGCs allowed the identification of a lasso peptide BGC, which we subsequently named bsf (Figure 1; Supplementary Figure S2; Wang et al., 2019). The candidate cluster consists of 7 open reading frames (ORFs) spanning 7.2 kb, bordered at one end by an FG-GAP repeat protein and at the other by ribosomal proteins, presumably not involved in lasso peptide biosynthesis. Apart from the conserved genes encoding the precursor peptide (bsfA), a discrete RRE (bsfB1), a leader peptidase (bsfB2), a lasso peptide cyclase (bsfC) and an ABC-transporter (bsfD), two additional genes encoding a putative kinase (bsfK) and a predicted nucleotidyltransferase (bsfN) have been found in this BGC as well. Herein, we characterized the activities of BsfK, BsfB1, and BsfB2. Figure 1The lasso peptide BGC (bsf) from Bradymonas sediminis FA350. The lasso peptide BGC (bsf) from Bradymonas sediminis FA350.