Introduction Tuberculosis (TB) is a severe infectious disease caused by the pathogenic bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). TB remains an enormous global health burden, causing an estimated 1.5 million deaths and 10 million new cases in 2020. TB was the leading cause of death in all infectious diseases until the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. Additionally, the growing percentage of multidrug-resistant (MDR) TB is a daunting obstacle to global TB treatment and prevention efforts. Since MDR TB is resistant to at least the two most potent TB drugs, isoniazid and rifampin, patients need new treatment options1,2. Consequently, new drugs addressing novel targets in Mtb are increasingly desired. Griselimycins (GMs) are such promising anti-TB antibiotics that bind and inhibit the mycobacterial DNA polymerase III sliding clamp (DnaN). This unique target makes GM distinct from other antibiotics to evade common TB drug resistance3. The unusual nonproteogenic amino acid (2 S,4 R)−4-methylproline ((2 S,4 R)−4-MePro) acts as an essential building block occurring twice in GM and thrice in methylgriselimycin (MGM). Oxidation of the metabolically unstable Pro8 residue initiates GM degradation. The significantly improved metabolic stability of GM derivatives with substituent groups at Pro8, such as the natural MGM with (2 S,4 R)−4-MePro, has corroborated this finding3. More importantly, GM congeners with different 4-alkyl groups show improved activity against Mtb which might be attributed to their enhanced lipophilicity3. In our previous study, the Fe(II)/α-ketoglutarate (α-KG)-dependent dioxygenase GriE was proven to initiate the biosynthesis of (2 S,4 R)−4-MePro by hydroxylating l-leucine to form (2 S,4 R)−5-hydroxyleucine. The zinc-dependent dehydrogenase GriF then converts (2 S,4 R)−5-hydroxyleucine to (2 S,4 R)−4-methylglutamate-5-semialdehyde. The resulting semialdehyde will be turned to (2 S,4 R)−4-MePro by a spontaneous cyclization and a final reduction by the pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase ProC or GriH (Fig. 1a)4. We previously reasoned that the genes required for synthesizing the (2 S,4 R)−4-MePro building block could be utilized to explore compounds containing such an unusual residue4. An earlier study discovered new natural products containing the diastereoisomer (2 S,4 S)−4-MePro from cyanobacteria employing different biosynthetic genes from the Nostopeptolide pathway as genome mining bait5.Fig. 1Discovery of mycoplanecin biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) by sequence similarity network (SSN) analysis.a GriE and GriF are essential for biosynthesis of (2 S,4 R)-4-MePro in the griselimycin (GM) pathway. b Sequence similarity networks for GriE (left) and GriF (right). All edges corresponding to sequence identity below 80 % were removed. The color of the edge represents the sequence similarity, with darker color corresponding to higher similarity. Node colors correspond to the type of the biosynthetic gene cluster (Supplementary Table 1). c Chemical structures of GM and ADEP1 which contain (2 S,4 R)-4-MePro. d The incomplete NRPS BGC from Actinoplanes awajinensis NRRL B-16712 shows similarity to GM BGC but also contains several different genes. Fig. 1Discovery of mycoplanecin biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) by sequence similarity network (SSN) analysis.a GriE and GriF are essential for biosynthesis of (2 S,4 R)-4-MePro in the griselimycin (GM) pathway. b Sequence similarity networks for GriE (left) and GriF (right). All edges corresponding to sequence identity below 80 % were removed. The color of the edge represents the sequence similarity, with darker color corresponding to higher similarity. Node colors correspond to the type of the biosynthetic gene cluster (Supplementary Table 1). c Chemical structures of GM and ADEP1 which contain (2 S,4 R)-4-MePro. d The incomplete NRPS BGC from Actinoplanes awajinensis NRRL B-16712 shows similarity to GM BGC but also contains several different genes. Discovery of mycoplanecin biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) by sequence similarity network (SSN) analysis. a GriE and GriF are essential for biosynthesis of (2 S,4 R)-4-MePro in the griselimycin (GM) pathway. b Sequence similarity networks for GriE (left) and GriF (right). All edges corresponding to sequence identity below 80 % were removed. The color of the edge represents the sequence similarity, with darker color corresponding to higher similarity. Node colors correspond to the type of the biosynthetic gene cluster (Supplementary Table 1). c Chemical structures of GM and ADEP1 which contain (2 S,4 R)-4-MePro. d The incomplete NRPS BGC from Actinoplanes awajinensis NRRL B-16712 shows similarity to GM BGC but also contains several different genes. In this work, we address the question of whether novel (2 S,4 R)-4-MePro-containing compounds from Actinobacteria with improved bioactivity and physicochemical properties could be discovered via genome mining using the gene pair griE and griF as the probe, considering that the GM producer Streptomyces sp. DSM408356,7 belongs to the order Actinomycetales, the most significant industrial source of natural product drugs8,9. We discover the previously unknown mycoplanecin (MP) biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) and isolate several MP derivatives that indeed exhibited significantly improved pharmaceutical properties compared to GM. Analysis of a co-crystal structure and biophysical assays prove that MPs bind to DnaN in the nanomolar range. In addition, we comprehensively characterize in vitro three interwoven and uncommon biosynthetic pathways to the non-natural amino acids building blocks of MPs: l-homoleucine, l-homonorleucine, and (2 S,4 R)-4-ethylproline ((2 S,4 R)-4-EtPro).