1. Introduction Sponges serve as reliable sources for isolating novel marine actinomycete species and natural products. Chemical defense is an important adaptation for sponges to deter predators and competitors, with diverse bioactive compounds identified such as sterols, nucleosides, cyclic peptides, and alkaloids [1]. Interestingly, these compounds are not exclusively synthesized by sponges but by their microbial symbionts [2]. Marine actinomycetes are recognized as a rich source for marine drug discovery. Adapted to the unique conditions of marine environments, such as high pressure, high salinity, and nutrient deficiencies, marine actinomycetes produce secondary metabolites distinct from their terrestrial counterparts [3]. Streptomyces spp. produce over 30 secondary metabolites on average, making them prolific secondary metabolite producers, which contributes to over 80% of bioactive compound production from natural sources [4]. However, microbial genome sequence analyses indicate that a single genome may contain 20–80 distinct BGCs, most of which are cryptic and cannot be expressed under standard laboratory culture conditions [5]. This suggested that the metabolic capabilities of bacteria exceeded what could be demonstrated in the laboratory due to severe gene silencing or low synthesis yields, making it challenging for analytical methods to detect these substances. The One Strain Many Compounds (OSMAC) strategy has been proven to be a promising tool for activating silent BGCs by altering pH and temperature, controlling the supply of oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, or phosphorus sources, and adding metal ions or inducers [6]. For example, the OSMAC strategy was used to identify Terrosamycins A and B, as well as two cyclic polyethers with anti-breast cancer activity from Streptomyces sp. RKND004 [7]. In addition, co-culture is another promising approach to activating novel secondary metabolites in marine actinomycetes by mimicking microbial interactions in natural environments. This approach stimulates the expression of cryptic BGCs by promoting interactions, defense, communication, and metabolite competition [8]. Moreover, marine sponges, associated with rich microorganisms, serve as natural microbial fermenters, providing abundant microbial resources and environments for co-culture. Common modes of co-culture include bacteria-bacteria, fungus-fungus, and bacterial-fungal co-cultures. For example, co-culturing Janthinobacterium sp. ZZ145 and ZZ148 yielded janthinopolyenemycins A and B, active against Candida albicans [9]; co-culturing Talaromyces aculeatus (Genbank no. KY76541) and Penicillium variabile HXQ-H-1 produced four novel polyketides toxic to cancer cell lines [10]; and co-culturing Streptomyces lividans TK24 with Fusarium tricinctum yielded four new naphthoquinone dimers, fusatricinones A–D [11]. The integration of genomic mining with metabolomic analysis has significantly accelerated natural product discovery. Genome mining has emerged as a powerful tool for estimating the genetic potential of strains, involving the scanning of the genome to identify BGCs responsible for secondary metabolites. Various tools, such as antiSMASH, are available for accurate prediction and analysis of BGCs and pathways [12]. Additionally, Mass spectrometry (MS)-based metabolomics plays a crucial role in studying natural products [13]. FBMN (Feature-Based Molecular Networking), a key analytical tool on the GNPS (Global Natural Products Social) Molecular Networking platform, organizes molecular ions into networks, streaming workflows and facilitating molecule annotation and analogs discovery [14]. By integrating MS/MS databases and molecular networks, correlating genomic and metabolite data deepens the understanding of BGCs, enhances structural elucidation accuracy, and reveals biosynthetic pathways and potential bioactive compounds. For instance, combinatorial genomics-metabolomics analysis of the marine strain led to the identification of novel bioactive compounds, including spirindamycins E and F, as well as two new α-pyrones, lagunapyron [15]. Saprolegnia parasitica is an aquatic pathogen posing a tremendous threat to the global aquaculture industry that manifests itself as grayish-white filamentous mycelial spots on the body or fins of fish [16]. The traditional treatment is to control it with malachite green, which was banned in 2002 due to its high carcinogenicity and toxicity [17]. Therefore, there is an urgent need to find more alternative treatments. In this study, we assessed the BGCs diversity of the Streptomyces strain and analyzed the secondary metabolite profiles of marine Streptomyces and fungal co-cultures. By integrating LC-MS/MS spectra, bioactivity assays, GNPS (Global Natural Products Social) molecular networks, exploration of natural product databases, isolation and purification of active compounds, and preliminary exploration of inhibitory mechanisms, we provided a comprehensive analysis of co-cultural biosynthetic diversity, demonstrating a promising potential for discovering bioactive compounds to combat aquatic pathogens.