INTRODUCTION Infections caused by highly antibiotic-resistant bacteria continue to pose a threat to public health because they represent one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide, including in developed countries (1). Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) makes treatment strategies more difficult because clinically available antibiotics are no longer effective. Unfortunately, the AMR burden is coupled with increasing costs and pressure on pricing for drug development (2). Therefore, diminishing the supply of new antibiotics that can replace these ineffective drugs remains an ongoing problem. Therefore, urgent efforts and immediate development to discover new antibiotics from potentially underexplored niches are required. Natural products play promising roles in the development of therapeutics against infectious diseases (3). Recently, the human microbiome has been recognized as a niche from which bioactive secondary metabolites can be isolated (3). Staphylococcus aureus is a disease-causing opportunistic pathogen that resides in the nasal cavities of 30% of the population and is prone to multidrug resistance (4, 5). To combat S. aureus infections, a notable bacterium being studied for its potential probiotic activities is a coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, Staphylococcus lugdunensis (6, 7). In recent years, clinical reports have shown that it can also be an emerging pathogen because it causes life-threatening invasive infections, such as endocarditis and periprosthetic joint infections (8). However, little attention has been paid to S. lugdunensis as a potential probiotic (6). In 2016, using functional and chemistry-based approaches, Zipperer et al. discovered that S. lugdunensis produced a novel antibiotic called lugdunin, which exhibited broad bioactivity against Gram-positive bacteria, including methicillin-resistant S. aureus, vancomycin, and glycopeptide-intermediate-resistant S. aureus strains (3, 9). S. lugdunensis IVK28 has a particularly strong capacity to prevent the growth of S. aureus (9). Lugdunin is a thiazolidine-containing cyclic peptide antibiotic that is synthesized non-ribosomally and belongs to a new class of antibiotics (9). The analysis of a transposon insertion site in the mutant M1 strain revealed the disruption of an uncharacterized gene encoding a putative non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) (9). The operon responsible for lugdunin biosynthesis consists of four NRPS genes (lugA, B, C, and D) encoding adenylation domains for five amino acids and is exclusively found in S. lugdunensis (9). Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) is the most widely used genotyping tool in epidemiological studies of S. lugdunensis to monitor its prevalence in hospitals (10
–
12). In addition, our previous study showed an association between ST and CRISPR-Cas types in S. lugdunensis (13). Among 130 CRISPR-Cas-positive S. lugdunensis isolates, type IIIA and type IIC CRISPR-Cas were found in 84 (64.6%) and 46 (35.4%) isolates, respectively (13). Isolates ST1, ST6, ST12, and ST15 harbored type IIIA CRISPR-Cas, whereas isolates ST4, ST27, and ST29 harbored type IIC CRISPR-Cas. None of the 60 ST3 isolates harbored type IIIA or type IIC CRISPR-Cas (13). Currently, clinical attention has been paid to S. lugdunensis because of its ability to resist β-lactam antibiotics such as oxacillin (oxacillin-resistant S. lugdunensis, ORSL) (11). Thus, SCCmec typing is a “gold standard method” to determine resistance to β-lactam antibiotics (14, 15). Most virulence factors in S. aureus are closely regulated by the agr locus, which encodes a two-component signaling pathway that can be divided into four major agr groups: types I–IV (16). The agr locus in S. lugdunensis was recently shown to play a role in biofilm formation and resistance to host immune killing (17, 18). Hence, despite well-reported evidence regarding the chemical structure and biosynthetic gene clusters of lugdunin, the epidemiology of lugdunin-producing strains and the association of lugdunin production with STs, SCCmec, and agr genotypes are still unknown. Thus, in the present study, we aimed to characterize lugdunin activity in S. lugdunensis clinical isolates collected from our hospital and investigate its association with different genotypes.