Introduction The evolution and spread of multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria is a matter of global health concern in the 21st century. A WHO report of 2017 identifies ESKAPE pathogens (Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species) as critical-priority pathogenic bacteria causing fatal antibiotic resistance (Tacconelli et al., 2018). The emergence and spread of MDR pathogens pose a significant threat to public health worldwide. Multi-drug resistance is a complex and multifaceted problem. MDR occurs due to various factors, including the overuse and misuse of antibiotics such as unnecessary prescriptions, inappropriate dosages, incomplete or prolonged treatment courses, a lack of proper and quick diagnostic measures (Cantón et al., 2013), inadequate infection prevention and control practices in health care facilities, poor adherence to hygiene, a lack of sanitation (Chinemerem Nwobodo et al., 2022), and the genetic adaptability of microbial species. Furthermore, routine use of antibiotics in livestock production and in farming and agriculture facilitates the emergence of drug-resistant strains that can spread to humans via the food web or chain (Aslam et al., 2021). Traditional antibiotics, once hailed as miraculous treatments, are becoming increasingly ineffective against these resilient microbial strains (Smith & Johnson, 2023). Mechanisms which collectively contribute to the reduced susceptibility of drug-resistant pathogens to conventional antibiotics are: 1) production of enzymes like β-lactamases, which break down the molecular structure of antibiotics to render them inactive, is a crucial strategy utilized by the pathogens (Egorov et al., 2018); 2) development of efflux pumps by drug-resistant bacteria to actively expel antibiotics and reduce their concentration in their cells; 3) modification of antibiotic target site; 4) enzymatic inactivation due to bacterial mutations causing production of altered ribosomes or enzymes which can diminish the binding affinity of antibiotics rendering them ineffective (Munita & Arias, 2016). The continuous selective pressure exerted by antibiotics has led to the evolution and dissemination of resistant strains, rendering many commonly used antibiotics ineffective (Davies & Davies, 2010). Consequently, infections caused by these drug-resistant pathogens are associated with higher mortality rates in vulnerable populations. Also lead to increased healthcare costs, prolonged hospital stays, and consuming more resources, resulting in the loss of productivity and necessitating high-acuity care. In recent years, the emergence of extensively drug-resistant (XDR) and pan-drug-resistant (PDR) bacteria has further exacerbated the crisis, leaving clinicians with limited or no treatment options (Struelens, 1998; Ozma et al., 2022). Above all, a lack of new antibiotic development strategies and dependence on already available antibiotics further exacerbate the problem. This growing crisis necessitates the development of novel strategies to enhance the efficacy of existing antibiotics and combat the rising tide of drug resistance. In order to extend the life and efficacy of the current antibiotic arsenal, such novel strategies should focus on 1) increasing awareness of antibiotic stewardship among all health care communities, 2) enhancing research and development facilities to improve antibiotic production (Prestinaci et al., 2015); and 3) finding ways to prolong the life span and efficiency of currently available antibiotics. Other approaches under investigation are whole genome sequencing, quorum quenching (QQ), viral phage therapy, monoclonal antibodies, drug repurposing, novel small-molecule antibiotics with a focus on biologics and non-antibiotic adjuvants, and complementary and alternative therapies (Uddin et al., 2021). All of these aim to preserve the healthy microbiota while at the same time working toward preventing infections and resistance. However, among all of these strategies, using “antibiotic adjuvants in combination with antibiotics” has proven to be the most successful and effective (González-Bello, 2017). Antibiotic adjuvants have emerged as a promising approach to counteract multi-drug resistance and restore the efficacy of existing antibiotics. Adjuvants are compounds or substances that are co-administered with antibiotics to enhance their antimicrobial activity. This can be achieved by either directly inhibiting bacterial resistance mechanisms or by potentiating the effects of antibiotics (Gill et al., 2015). The use of antibiotic adjuvants to resist AMR has potential advantages over the development of entirely new antibiotics. Adjuvants can effectively enhance the potency of existing antibiotics. This is made possible by lowering the minimum inhibitory concentration of the antibiotic required to kill the bacteria and allowing for the preservation of currently available treatment options (Melander and Melander, 2017; Laws et al., 2019). Repurposing the antibacterial compounds rendered obsolete (Schweizer, 2019), (Boyd et al., 2021) opens up the possibility of developing numerous analogues as antibiotic adjuvants. Moreover, the combination of adjuvants with antibiotics has the potential to reduce the rates of bacterial mutations, which has the potential to slow the development of resistance because of the well-conserved putative bacterial target (Allen & Brown, 2019). This approach represents a synergistic strategy where the combined effect of the adjuvant and the antibiotic is greater than the sum of their individual effects (Gill et al., 2015). AAs are resistant to antibiotics due to their unique mechanism (Annunziato, 2019), and most importantly, there is no selection pressure as the compounds are nonantibiotic in nature (Melander & Melander, 2017). The antibiotic adjuvant strategy also has certain limitations, like the identification of compounds or substances with essential physicochemical properties that can be used as adjuvants and co-administered with antibiotics, which is a daunting task. Additionally, the drug-drug interactions between antibiotics and adjuvants need to be assessed to avoid deleterious effects. Moreover, to facilitate an efficient co-dosing regimen with optimal spatial and temporal delivery options, adjuvants and antibiotics must have pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties that are compatible with one another. (Melander & Melander, 2017; Chawla et al., 2022). Concisely, antibiotic adjuvants are essential to enhance the susceptibility of bacteria to antibiotics and combat MDR. (Dhanda et al., 2023). In the fight against MDR infections, the development and implementation of antibiotic adjuvants is a crucial weapon that offers hope for promising treatment alternatives against the impending danger. The main objective of this review is to provide a brief overview of the alarming issue of multi-drug resistance. It also discusses the mechanisms by which bacteria are rendering antibiotics obsolete, as well as the latest advancements in the development of antibiotic adjuvants. Furthermore, this research tries to notify the gap in the existing scenario and establish links between various strategies that are required to overcome AMR and make a substantial impact on public health and patient outcomes.