Introduction Since the discovery of antibiotics in 1928, commonly used as a weapon of choice against infections, the frequency of antibiotic-resistant infections are increasing rapidly. The widespread use and misuse of antibiotics, inadequate surveillance and regulations has led the bacteria to evolve into antibiotic-resistant strains.1 Some factors like inappropriate and repeated use of similar antibiotic sets, demography, lifestyle and host biology play a significant role in sensitivity of resistance leading to enhancement in antimicrobial resistance (AMR).2,3 Consequently, the therapeutic efficacy of antibiotics is significantly reduced by pathogenic AMR and it has led to the evolution of multidrug resistance (MDR) pathogens.4,5 Therefore, the eradication of MDR complication is utmost important by developing some novel therapies. MDR is a global health emergency, leading to a huge financial burden, causing substantial morbidity and mortality, threatening to undermine the practice of medicine.6,7 As per the center for disease control and prevention (CDC) records, there is an urgent threat from drug-resistant bacteria, which include Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE), Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii,8
Clostridioides difficile (C. difficile) and Drug-resistant Neisseria gonorrhoeae (N. gonorrhoeae). Some other serious threat bacteria include extended-spectrum beta-lactamase, drug-resistant (Campylobacter, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Shigella, Salmonella serotype typhi, M. tuberculosis, and non-typhoidal Salmonella). In addition, other bacteria in this category include (ESBL)-producing Enterobacteriaceae, multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, (P. aeruginosa), vancomycin-resistant Enterococci (VRE), and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). While the concerning threat strains also include Clindamycin-resistant group B Streptococcus and Erythromycin-resistant group A Streptococcus.9 Even though, not all bacterial groups are resistant to antibiotics, six major MDR bacteria, commonly known as ESKAPE bugs are identified which mostly evade the antibiotics action. These include Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumonia, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species and these bacteria are mainly responsible for global nosocomial infections.10,11 Different approaches have been practiced time to time to combat the problems of AMR. These approaches include the use of vaccines, drug repurposing, antimicrobial peptides, phage therapy, anti-virulence compounds, etc. Each of these strategies has some unique features but also suffers from some limitations, thus pushing the researchers to explore some new alternatives with enhanced efficiency. The strategy of RNA interference, restriction endonucleases, and other genome-editing tools have also been practiced recently to combat the problems of MDR.12 The recent breakthrough towards combating the AMR has led to the use of Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated sequence (CRISPR/Cas), primarily a prokaryotic immune system, to overcome the problems of antibiotic resistance challenges.13 CRISPR/Cas system are well-known genome-editing defense systems with different classes, types and subtypes, present in prokaryotes and archaea against mobile genetic elements, plasmids and phages. The discovery of the CRISPR/Cas system has been a major breakthrough in genome-editing technology. This tool allows the bacteria to be specifically modulated genetically for its virulence or resistance.14 Among all CRISPR/Cas types, CRISPR/Cas9 possess some special features, due to its simple structure, high versatility and is thoroughly studied as a genome-editing tool, thus making it highly suitable for MDR applications.15 In this review, the recent updates of some molecular mechanisms of AMR are explored. In this context, the novel approaches of CRISPR/Cas9 as a genome-editing tool to diminish the MDR are discussed. In addition, the delivery approaches of this genome-editing tool to different bacteria are demonstrated. Furthermore, some challenges and future prospects of MDR is also elaborated.