INTRODUCTION Plant pathogenic fungi cause serious diseases, resulting in crop yield loss and reducing crop quality worldwide (1). To control plant disease, chemical fungicides have been widely used, but the overuse of these fungicides has led to concerns about the hazards to humans, animals, and the environment and the increase of fungicide resistance (2). The resistance to single‐site fungicides, including methyl benzimidazoles, demethylation inhibitors, quinone outside inhibitors (QoIs), and succinate dehydrogenase inhibitors (SDHIs), has been reported in field trials and has spread throughout fungal pathogen populations, reducing the disease control efficacy. To date, the resistance mechanisms of plant pathogenic fungi have been extensively studied in terms of the alteration and overexpression of target proteins and the efflux and degradation of fungicides (3, 4). Mitochondrial respiration, or oxidative phosphorylation, is a crucial cellular process of eukaryotic cells. SDHI and QoI fungicides have been developed to inhibit mitochondrial respiration, particularly the electron transport chain (ETC). These fungicides are the dominant chemicals for crop protection against fungal pathogens because of their broad antifungal spectrum against ascomycete, basidiomycete, and oomycete pathogens (5). However, as a consequence of extensive and frequent use, it has been reported that the efficacy of these fungicides is gradually declining for crop protection because of increased resistance (4). Nevertheless, because mitochondrial respiration is indispensable for various cellular functions, including energy metabolism, and respiration inhibitors exhibit a broad antifungal spectrum, mitochondrial respiration is still an attractive target for developing fungicides (6, 7). For the determination of respiration inhibition activity, many researchers have used a simple assay that compares yeast growth in two different liquid media containing a fermentable and non-fermentable carbon source as the sole carbon source (8). QoI fungicides strongly affect the growth inhibition of yeast grown in a medium containing a non-fermentable carbon source compared to growth in a fermentable carbon source (8). Therefore, this assay can discover useful natural resources, such as microbes and plant extracts, showing respiratory inhibition activity (9). To counteract the escalating risks (e.g., toxicity and resistance issues) of chemical fungicides, interest in biological control agents (BCAs) for plant disease control has significantly increased. To find valuable BCAs, most research has focused on the antibiosis of beneficial microbes during initial screening procedures (10). The microbial strains from the genera Bacillus, Pseudomonas, and Agrobacterium have the most crucial role in biological control and have been commercialized as a biopesticides (11, 12). It has also been reported that several Brevibacillus spp. exhibit a strong antimicrobial activity against plant pathogens, indicating an excellent potential for biocontrol (13). The genus Brevibacillus, one of the most common genera of Gram-positive bacteria, is distributed widely in environmental habitats and includes 20 species that produce various antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), such as tostadin, gramicidins, edeines, and tyrocidines (14). AMPs made by Brevibacillus spp. are structurally diverse and can be classified based on their biosynthesis pathway and structural traits (14). Moreover, these AMPs can be recognized into two groups based on the mechanism of antimicrobial action: (i) AMPs targeting cell-surface components such as cell wall and membrane-bound protein and (ii) AMPs targeting intracellular components such as ribosomes and the nucleic acid synthesis machinery (14). Although the antimicrobial mechanisms of AMPs have been studied extensively, more information is still needed about the detailed mode of action in fungal organisms, particularly in plant pathogenic fungi. As a necrotrophic fungus, Fusarium graminearum is a highly destructive pathogen causing severe diseases in cereal crops, such as maize, wheat, barley, and rice (15). The infection of this pathogen causes yield loss of crops but also contaminates grains with mycotoxins that are harmful to humans and animals (15). Control of Fusarium head blight (FHB) caused by F. graminearum is highly dependent upon the application of synthetic fungicides; however, many researchers are greatly concerned about these chemical fungicides, such as carbendazim, tebuconazole, and azoxystrobin that trigger mycotoxin deoxynivalenol (DON) biosynthesis (16, 17). Biocontrol with BCAs can be an alternative approach to chemical control and could be used as part of the integrated management of FHB and mycotoxin production (18). This study aimed to find a useful microbe exhibiting respiratory inhibitory activity, considering that SDHI and QoI fungicides targeting mitochondrial respiration are biologically active against all the stages of fungal growth (5, 19). Furthermore, an initial discovery that the culture filtrate (CF) of the Brevibacillus brevis HK544 strain inhibited mitochondrial respiration led to the discovery of an active compound edeine B1 (EB1) responsible for the respiration inhibition activity. The biological function of EB1 through transcriptome analysis, drug-induced haploinsufficiency (DIH) analysis, and targeted mutagenesis revealed that EB1 has effects on multiple aspects of respiration and that most of the mitochondrial-related genes in F. graminearum are downregulated by EB1. With an emphasis on understanding the molecular basis of EB1 in antifungal activity, our findings show that the B. brevis HK544 strain could be a useful resource for developing new natural agents to control FHB.