Introduction Fungi produce a plethora of biologically active small molecules, called secondary metabolites (SMs). Many fungal SMs are currently used in medicine, and they include antibiotics such as penicillin, antifungals such as the echinocandins, cholesterol-lowering agents such as lovastatin, and immune-modifying agents such as cyclosporine (reviewed in Bok et al., 2006; Demain, 2014; Keller et al., 2005; Martin, 1998; Palaez, 2005). Almost universally, the genes that encode particular SM biosynthetic pathways are clustered together in the genome, forming biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) (Galagan et al., 2005; Zhang et al., 2004). Secondary metabolite BGCs contain one or more core biosynthetic genes responsible for synthesizing the backbone of the SM as well as other genes that encode products that modify the backbone structure, influence production of the SM, or confer resistance to the SM. Generally, the genes within each BGC are coordinately regulated, in many cases being controlled by a transcription factor (TF) in the cluster (Brakhage, 2013; Keller et al., 2005; Keller, 2019; Macheleidt et al., 2016). Secondary metabolite BGCs can be grouped into major classes based on their core biosynthetic genes and the building blocks they use for synthesis of the backbone structure. Non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) BGCs utilize standard and modified amino acids; polyketide synthase (PKS) BGCs utilize acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA; terpene synthase and cyclase BGCs utilize isoprene units; and dimethylallyl tryptophan synthase (DMATS) BGCs use tryptophan and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (Keller et al., 2005). These core biosynthetic backbone genes can be readily identified through bioinformatics due to their highly conserved structural domains (Andersen et al., 2013). While the research community has discovered tens of thousands of fungal SMs over decades of research, genome sequencing and bioinformatics have revealed that the BGCs that make known SMs are only a small fraction of the total SM BGCs that exist. It follows that we have discovered only a fraction of the compounds that fungi are capable of creating (de Vries et al., 2017; Drott et al., 2020; Inglis et al., 2013; Lind et al., 2015; Nielsen et al., 2017). The fact that there are many more SM BGCs than known SMs reflects the fact that the majority of fungal SM BGCs are not expressed under the typical laboratory growth conditions that have been used for SM discovery. Perhaps more importantly, it illustrates that there is vast potential for the discovery of new bioactive molecules from fungi that can be used to improve human health. Although most fungal SM BGCs are normally silent, in recent years a number of molecular genetic approaches have been developed in species with established molecular genetic systems, such as Aspergillus nidulans, to activate the expression of endogenous SM BGCs (Ahuja et al., 2012; Brakhage, 2013; Chiang et al., 2013, 2016; Grau et al., 2018, 2019; Henke et al., 2016; Keller, 2015; Kjærbølling et al., 2019a; Oakley et al., 2017; Yin et al., 2013; Yaegashi et al., 2014; Yeh et al., 2016; Yan et al., 2018, 2020). Efficient heterologous expression systems have been developed in some of these species to express BGCs from species that do not have established molecular genetic systems (Anyaogu and Mortensen, 2015; Chiang et al., 2013; Clevenger et al., 2017; Frandsen et al., 2018; Harvey et al., 2018; Kjærbølling et al., 2019a; Sakai et al., 2012; van Dijk and Wang, 2016). In spite of this progress, however, a major gap remains in our ability to exploit the greater fungal secondary metabolome efficiently. It is currently impossible to deduce the complete structure(s) of the compound(s) an SM BGC makes until it is synthesized; generally, we can only guess the class of compound the cluster produces. Additionally, the activities of compounds are discovered only after the compound's induction, purification, and extensive testing, all of which are very time consuming and labor intensive. There is a great need to be able to identify BGCs, among the millions present in fungi, that are likely to produce compounds with activities we desire. Discoveries in our lab and others (Hutchinson et al., 2000; Hansen et al., 2011; Kennedy et al., 1999; Regueira et al., 2011; Yeh et al., 2016; Yan et al., 2018, 2020) have led to the development of a strategy that fulfills this need in many cases. This strategy, called SM resistance gene-guided genome mining, has enabled researchers to determine the targets of SMs produced by some fungal BGCs in silico, before their expression, isolation, and biological testing. This approach is based on the fact that some SM BGCs contain a gene that encodes a resistant form of the protein targeted by the compound produced by the BGC. The resistant allele is expressed along with the other genes of the BGC, and it confers resistance to the compound. This allows the compound-producing organism to survive while killing or inhibiting the growth of competing organisms. The in silico signature of such BGCs is that they contain an allele of an essential gene that has no SM biosynthetic function, and there is a second allele of that gene elsewhere in the genome. Other mechanisms of self-resistance to SMs exist, but, fortunately, resistance due to the presence of resistant alleles of essential genes in SM BGCs occurs frequently enough to potentially make this approach very useful. Manually searching for this in silico signature is time consuming, and it is not practical at a large scale. At the time of this study, 1825 fungal genomes sequenced by the Joint Genome Institute were available on the MycoCosm web portal (mycocosm.jgi.doe.gov), and they contained 59 126 putative SM BGCs. The number of sequenced fungal genomes, fortunately, continues to increase rapidly, and a rapid, computer-guided method for resistance gene-guided genome mining is needed. Currently, there are three published computer-guided approaches for resistance gene-guided genome mining in fungi (Kjærbølling et al., 2019b; Liu et al., 2021; Yılmaz et al., 2023). All are designed to be used with whole-genome sequencing data. In contrast, our goal has been to develop a process that enables users to query an annotated genomic database to find SM BGCs with resistance genes of our choice without downloading each individual genome. This allows the user to focus on genes that encode promising therapeutic targets. We have written a Python script that we have named rg3m, an abbreviation for resistance gene-guided genome miner. This script allows us to identify instances in which a designated target gene is within a user-specified distance of an SM core biosynthetic gene, and (in the default setting) there are at least two copies of the target gene in the genome. rg3m has no additional assumptions. We have employed this approach with MycoCosm (https://mycocosm.jgi.doe.gov/mycocosm/home), a database of 1825 annotated fungal genomes, although, in principle, the approach would work with other databases of annotated genomes. We have tested this approach by applying it to look for SM BGCs that target the proteasome β6 subunit or HMG-CoA reductase (HMGCR). The proteasome β6 subunit is the target of the proteasome inhibitor fellutamide B, and proteasome inhibitors have a growing number of therapeutic uses in cancer chemotherapy (Goldberg, 2012; Kisselev et al., 2012). HMG-CoA reductase is a key enzyme in sterol biosynthesis, and it is the target of cholesterol reducing therapeutics such as lovastatin (Alberts, 1990). Both are known to be produced by BGCs that contain resistant alleles of the target molecule (Hutchinson et al., 2000; Kennedy et al., 1999; Yeh et al., 2016) and if our approach is successful, we should find these known lovastatin-family and fellutamide family BGCs. We have found that our approach not only found known fellutamide and lovastatin BGCs, but previously undocumented examples as well. It also revealed BGC families that are closely related to documented fellutamide and lovastatin BGCs but with variations in the complement of SM genes that suggest that these BGCs could produce structural variants of fellutamides and lovastatin. Gratifyingly, we also found SM BGCs that are not closely related to lovastatin BGCs but putatively produce novel HMGCR inhibitors. In summary, our script is effective and easy to use, and it is not computationally heavy. It works in synergy with the accessible and user-friendly MycoCosm platform that has strong gene annotations and SM cluster prediction tools, allowing users to search for SM clusters harboring specific resistance genes without having to download entire genomes.