Introduction The tea plant (Camellia sinensis) is an important cash crop, and its beneficial metabolites are valuable for human health (Pan et al., 2022). Similar to other plants, tea plants are vulnerable to many diseases throughout their life cycle. Among them, fungal diseases are the most serious hazards to tea plants, resulting in a decline in tea production and quality. For example, tea white scab disease occurs year-round in the Chinese tea host production area, generally resulting in a reduction of approximately 10% in production and a reduction of over 50% in the sick tea garden (Zhou et al., 2019). Tea gray blight can reduce tea production by 10–20% (Sanjay et al., 2008). For a long time, chemical control has been the main means to address tea plant diseases. However, there are fewer pesticides registered for tea plant diseases, and long-term single and excessive use of chemical pesticides has caused problems such as pathogen resistance, pesticide residues, and environmental pollution. Therefore, tea plantations urgently need a sustainable, environmentally friendly, and anti-drug-resistance plant disease control technology to replace traditional chemical control. Microbial pesticides have become one of the ideal strategies for the comprehensive control of tea plant diseases due to their persistence and environmental friendliness. Brevibacillus spp. is an essential source of biocontrol microorganisms and is widespread in nature, having been discovered in soil, flora, seawater, and the intestinal tracts of animals (Ruiu, 2013). There are 20 species in the genus, including 10 Bacillus species discovered previously (the Br. brevis cluster). Br. brevis is the parent species of the genus Brevibacillus (Shida et al., 1996). It has been reported in the disciplines of biological control of plant maladies, pollution degradation, and heavy metal remediation (Samrot et al., 2015; Che et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016). Brevibacillus is one of the most studied bacterial groups, and it has been one of the most important producers of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) (Yang and Yousef, 2018). AMPs play an important role in bacteriostasis (Xu et al., 2023). AMPs can be classified according to their biosynthetic pathways as ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides (Ripps) and non-ribosomally synthesized peptides (NRPS). Currently, the preponderance of Brevibacillus AMPs are produced by non-ribosomal eptide synthetases. They consist of edeine (A, B, D, and F) (Czajgucki et al., 2006), gramicidin (A-C, S) (Govaerts et al., 2001; Kessler et al., 2004), gratisin (Tamaki et al., 1983), tyrocidine (A-D) (Mootz and Marahiel, 1997), BT1583 (Wu et al., 2005), tostadin (Song et al., 2012), tauramamide (Desjardine et al., 2007), brevistin (Shoji and Kato, 1976), spergualin (Takeuchi et al., 1981), loloatin (A-D) (Gerard et al., 1999), laterocidin (Xu et al., 2010), and tridecapeptide families (Yang et al., 2017). Brevibacillus spp. generate numerous Ripps, such as laterosporulin (Singh et al., 2012), laterosporulin10 (Baindara et al., 2016), and Bac-GM100 (Ghadbane et al., 2013). Most Brevibacillus AMPs exert their antimicrobial effect via cytoplasmic membrane damage, but edeine inhibits DNA synthesis and protein translation and synthesis at varying concentrations (Szer and Kurylo-Borowska, 1972; Dinos et al., 2004). However, the diversity of types and structures of AMPs has also led to difficulties in the purification and identification of traditional chemical analysis techniques. Fortunately, the development of next-generation sequencing technology over the past two decades has consequently stimulated research on the comparative genomics of Br. brevis. More biocontrol strains of Br. brevis have had their entire genomes sequenced in order to investigate the relationships between antibacterial mechanisms and the underlying genetic diversity of Br. brevis genomes. With the advancement of bioinformatics prediction, AMP gene clusters have been continuously identified. The metabolic pathway database of AMPs, which can annotate the protein gene clusters of biocontrol bacteria at the gene level and predict the results of secondary metabolites, has been perpetually improved, making the rapid identification of AMPs feasible. In addition, with the continuous publication of multiple microbial genomes and the comparison of microbial genomes between different individuals of the same species, it is gradually recognized that a single reference genome cannot represent diversity within a species (Cuellar-Gaviria et al., 2023; Wan et al., 2023). In this study, a strain of Br. brevis HNCS-1 with broad-spectrum antibacterial activity was isolated from the tea garden soil. To gain a comprehensive understanding of the biocontrol potential of strain HNCS-1, we sequenced the genome of Br. brevis HNCS-1. A comparative genomic analysis was conducted to characterize the pan-genome structure of this biocontrol bacterium, assembled with 17 public Br. brevis genomes. An NRPS gene cluster was found in the core genome, which may be related to the antibacterial ability of Br. brevis. This study provides a genetic context for future research on AMPs and provides a scientific basis for further optimizing the field applications of the microbial biopesticide derived from Br. brevis HNCS-1.