1. Introduction It is well known that nitrogen-containing heterocycles are privileged structures in medicinal chemistry because their derivatives have various biological properties [1]. The importance of nitrogen heterocycles as key pharmacophoric moieties lies in the synthesis of novel anticancer compounds [2,3,4,5,6]. Indeed, the presence of different nitrogen electron-donor atoms in the structure improves the interaction with target proteins, enzymes, and receptors through the formation of several types of interactions, such as hydrogen bonds, dipole-dipole, hydrophobic interactions, van der Waals forces, and π-stacking interactions. The chemistry of N-oxides of heterocyclic compounds is one of the dynamically developing areas of organic synthesis. Aliphatic and aromatic N-oxides are known as prodrugs due to their ability to be reduced by various oxidoreductases expressed in bacterial and tumor cells [7,8]. Quinoxaline 1,4-dioxides attract close attention due to their wide spectrum of biological activity. The presence of two N-oxide groups determines the pharmaceutical properties of quinoxaline-1,4-dioxides, such as antibacterial, antitumor, antifungal, insecticidal, herbicidal, and antiparasitic. The synthetic availability and biological potential of quinoxaline 1,4-dioxides define the prospects for their use in the targeted design of compounds with practical and valuable properties. Moreover, the interest in heterocyclic N-oxides is explained by the presence of such structures in certain biologically active compounds found in natural sources. An example of a natural compound based on quinoxaline 1,4-dioxide is 6-chloro-2-quinoxalinecarboxylic acid 1,4-dioxide (1, Figure 1) produced by Streptomyces ambofaciens, which can inhibit the growth of gram-positive bacteria. It has been noted that esters and amides of this acid also have antibacterial activity [9]. Iodinin (2, Figure 1) is another example of a derivative of natural origin with a related structure to quinoxaline 1,4-dioxide [10]. Iodinin (2) was first identified and isolated from the bacterial culture Chromobacterium iodinum [11], and its antimicrobial properties were described in 1943 by H. McIlwain [12]. The results of recent studies have shown that iodinin (2) exhibits high cytotoxicity and selectivity for acute myeloid leukemia and promyelocytic leukemia cells (EC50 values for apoptotic cell death were 40 times lower than for non-tumor cells). Notably, iodinin (2) induced apoptosis in tumor cell isolates from patients with a poor survival prognosis [13,14]. Since the second half of the twentieth century, many researchers have observed the pronounced antibacterial activity of synthetic quinoxaline 1,4-dioxides. Some derivatives have been patented as antimicrobial agents and have found application in husbandry as promoters that increase animal weight gain [15]. Certain quinoxaline derivatives have also been patented and used in clinical practice as antibacterial drugs. For example, quinoxidine (3; 2,3-bis(acetoxymethyl)quinoxaline 1,4-dioxide, Figure 2) and dioxidine (4; 2,3-bis(hydroxymethyl)quinoxaline 1,4-dioxide, Figure 2) have been used in the clinic since the 1970s as broad-spectrum antibacterial agents [16]. Further studies have shown that quinoxaline 1,4-dioxides are a promising scaffold for the development of new drugs for the treatment of tuberculosis and parasitic infections such as malaria, trypanosomiasis, leishmaniasis, amoebiasis, and trichomoniasis [17]. For instance, derivative 5 (Figure 3) [18] has demonstrated promising antituberculosis activity, while compounds 6 and 7 exhibited high fungicidal [19] and antiviral [20] effects, respectively (Figure 3). Derivatives of quinoxaline-2-carbonitrile 1,4-dioxide, such as compound 8 (Figure 3), exhibit selective cytotoxicity against solid tumor cells under hypoxic conditions [21]. However, despite the high biological activity of quinoxaline 1,4-dioxides, the derivatives described in the literature have several disadvantages associated with low solubility, mutagenicity [22], photoallergic reactions [23,24], and the development of bacterial resistance [25]. Methods for the synthesis and biological activity of quinoxaline 1,4-dioxides have been previously discussed in several papers [26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36]. However, the reviews published in the last twenty years have primarily focused on the biological aspects of quinoxaline 1,4-dioxides, providing limited consideration of their chemical properties and structure-activity relationships. In addition, the current reviews on the chemistry and biology of quinoxaline 1,4-dioxides do not contain up-to-date information published since 2016. Moreover, the information regarding the synthesis methods and chemical modifications of this class of compounds has not been systematized yet. Therefore, there is an interest in the general analysis and summarization of the data in the field of synthesis, modification, and biological properties of quinoxaline 1,4-dioxides, as well as the coverage of emerging trends in their study in medicinal chemistry and pharmaceuticals.