Introduction Comparative transcriptome profiling is difficult to apply to non-model organisms as traditional nucleic acid extraction protocols and approaches do not often translate well to these systems (Shomron, 2021). This is particularly true when working with fungi that have extensive rhizoid or mycelial networks and chitin-rich cell walls (Orpin, 1977), which require difficult lysis and extraction protocols to isolate sufficient quantities of high-quality nucleic acids (Maaroufi et al., 2004; Fredricks et al., 2005; Edwards et al., 2017). For example, anaerobic fungi are non-model organisms that serve as a valuable source of diverse carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes), with powerful biomass-degrading capabilities (Youssef et al., 2013; Edwards et al., 2017; Haitjema et al., 2017; Henske et al., 2017; Wilken et al., 2021). This means that they are particularly useful in biotechnology applications to generate value-added products from low-cost waste materials (Sanderson, 2011; Solomon et al., 2016b; Haitjema et al., 2017). Moreover, these fungi also produce unique natural products (Swift et al., 2021b; Swift et al., 2021a), which probably enables their function and which could be harnessed as an emerging class of antimicrobials or as therapeutic compounds. Several research teams have worked to develop unique lysis and extraction approaches to overcome challenges associated with obtaining high-quality genomic DNA from anaerobic fungi to access this biotechnology potential (Youssef et al., 2013; Calkins et al., 2016; Solomon et al., 2016b; Solomon et al., 2016c). Although advancements to overcome the challenges associated with extracting DNA and RNA from non-model microbes, such as anaerobic fungi, have been made, universally effective RNA extraction methods are not yet well established for anaerobic fungi. For example, it is extremely challenging to extract similar quantities of high-quality RNA in the lag, exponential growth, and stationary phases that may prove relevant to deciphering the function of certain fungal genes (Solomon et al., 2014). Most gut fungal RNA studies to date have collected RNA data from one time point in the mid-log growth phase. These studies have focused on the differential regulation of CAZymes and/or the biosynthetic genes, which encode natural products within anaerobic fungi (Solomon et al., 2016a; Li et al., 2019; Swift et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2021), as altered by substrate, or cocultivation with other organisms. The ability to collect RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data for a full-time course across all growth regimes provides valuable information regarding when the CAZyme and biosynthetic genes of interest are expressed. Determining how widely expression varies as a function of the growth phase would also inform bioreactor design to maximize the production of target products (e.g., enzymes or metabolites) produced by anaerobic fungi, either in isolation or in co-culture. To monitor gene expression, a reliable method for the collection of high-quality RNA for transcriptomic analysis is needed. This study investigates how the time of harvest affects RNA quality, RNA concentration, and transcriptional regulation, with a focus on biomass-degrading enzymes and other fungal cellulosome components. We chose to examine fungal–methanogen co-cultures and fungal monocultures, as previous studies (Li et al., 2019; Swift et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2021) have demonstrated that the transcription of CAZymes increases at a given time point in the fungal growth phase when cocultivated with a methanogen. Fungal monocultures of Anaeromyces robustus and co-cultures of A. robustus and the methanogen Methanobacterium bryantii were cultivated on filter paper and harvested at 24-hour timepoints from the second day of growth to the seventh day of growth post inoculation for RNA extraction and subsequent RNA quality and quantity assessment. The optimal time frame in which to harvest anaerobic fungal monocultures and fungal-methanogen co-cultures for RNA extraction was 2-5 days of growth post-inoculation. During this window of growth, overall fungal CAZyme regulation in anaerobic fungal co-cultures with methanogens as compared with fungal monocultures was dependent on the time of harvest. The genes encoding fungal cellulosome components were upregulated in co-cultures of fungi and methanogens relative to fungal monocultures, with variation in expression occurring at 24-hour intervals. These findings highlight that timing and the phase of fungal growth are important factors to consider when designing experiments and deciphering transcriptomic regulation patterns.