1. Introduction Due to their sequestered growth, plants develop a range of defenses when being eaten by insects, including constitutive and induced defenses. The induced defense of plants can only be manifested in the presence of exogenous stimuli. For example, plants can produce various induced defense responses after being infested by phytophagous insects and then develop insect resistance through changes in physiology, biochemistry, and morphological characteristics [1]. The induced defense of plants against insects is mainly dependent on the secondary metabolites of plants. Secondary metabolites are the main chemical weapons of plants’ defense that are formed by plants through physiological and biochemical mechanisms in the long-term evolutionary process to cope with a variety of environmental stresses, constituting an important part of the plants’ defense and anti-stress systems [2]. A variety of toxic secondary metabolites, such as steroidal compounds, terpenes, phenols, indoles, and nitrogenous chemicals are produced when plants are subjected to insect pests. These substances can resist, avoid, poison, hinder the growth and development of insects, or attract natural enemies [3,4]. Insects may show a significant decrease in their pupation rate and survival rate, as well as a decrease in food intake when they are directly exposed to or fed with secondary metabolites having anthelmintic activity. These defensive secondary metabolites are normally present at relatively low levels in plants and are not essential, but they are important for plants’ role in resisting environmental stresses and responding to external stimuli, especially against insect damage [5]. For example, benzoxazinoids (BXs) are important defensive secondary metabolites in plants that are both anti-insect and anti-disease, and the BXs glucosides in the vesicles are interpreted hydrologically to release toxic glycosidic ligands for defense against insects when plants are eaten by herbivorous insects [6]. The concentration of the toxin mexofuranoside is very low in Pastinaca sativa roots and rapidly rises when the plants are damaged [7]. When Spodoptera litura feeds on tobacco leaves (Nicotiana tabacum), the nicotine content in the leaves increases for defensive purposes [8,9]. 3-deoxyanthocyanidins in wild-type Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench significantly increased the mortality of maize aphids (Rhopalosiphum maidis Fitch) compared with ineffective mutants lacking them. The content of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) increases when Choristoneura rosaceana crawls on soybean leaves, which inhibits the neurotransmission of herbivorous insects, reduces their development rate, and promotes their death [10]. Insects can feed on solid plants by stinging or chewing, and the plants activate their own defense mechanism under the action of inducing factors in the insects’ saliva, producing changes in proteins and enzymes and ultimately inducing the synthesis of defensive secondary metabolites in the metabolic network of the energy and materials in the plants in response to biotic stresses [1]. Therefore, it is possible to study the chemical composition of plants after feeding by insects and to explore the basis of substances with anti-insect activity. Rice (Oryza sative L.) is an important food crop and is cultivated over a huge area across the world [11]. Insect pests are one of the main causes of rice yield reduction, and the economic losses caused by insect pests in the world are close to USD 10 billion every year [12]. The use of chemical pesticides poses a potential threat to food safety and destabilizes agroecosystems [13]. Therefore, the use of rice resistance is an important method of modern crop pest control. When rice is eaten by herbivorous insects, it is induced to produce and accumulate a large number of targeted defensive substances, which affect a series of physiological and biochemical processes, such as molting, reproduction, metabolism, and energy conversion, in the insects [14]. The secondary metabolites produced by pest stress can be transferred from affected parts to the whole rice plant, and most of these metabolites play a regulatory role in the growth and development of herbivorous insects [15]. Tryptamine levels in rice leaves were 12 times higher than those in the control group when eaten by Chilo suppressalis, and the receptivity of leaf tissue to larvae was negatively correlated with the level of tryptamine on the leaf surface [16,17]. The secondary metabolite tryptamine is involved in plant defense. In addition, 2 terpenoids and 11 unknown compounds were identified in rice stressed by brown plant hopper, rice leaf roller, and Chilo suppressalis [18]. But, so far, the material basis for insect resistance activity in rice remains unexplained. In this paper, we analyzed two different treatments of rice (insect-infested (T1) and non-infested (T2)) by metabolomics, screened out unique metabolites in T1, and evaluated the insect-resistant activities of different metabolites. An analytical method was established for the determination of anti-insect active substances, and their contents were found in T1 and T2. Detoxification enzyme activity and transcriptome sequencing were performed to reveal the anti-insect mechanisms of these substances. The results of this study could elucidate the chemical–ecological mechanisms of insect resistance in rice, promote the sustainable development of agriculture, and guarantee food security.