Introduction Plants and bacteria have coevolved for over 480 million years producing a plethora of interactions between the kingdoms. To protect against pathogenic bacteria, plants produce a large array of secondary metabolites, of which phenolic compounds have been widely reported as antimicrobial agents (Pasqua et al., 2019). In response, phytopathogenic bacteria have evolved systems to deal with this rich chemical environment, including plasma membrane efflux pumps (EP) that remove toxic compounds from the cell, minimizing the pressure and facilitating survival and colonization of the host (Du et al., 2018; Pasqua et al., 2019). Large numbers of diverse and structurally unrelated compounds are excreted by EP, including disinfectants, dyes, organic solvents, detergents, bile acids, hormones, heavy metals, and a variety of defense active phytochemicals (Piddock, 2006; Alibert et al., 2017). EP are commonly classified into five families based on their number of transmembrane spanning regions, energy sources and substrates. Of these five families, the resistance-nodulation-division (RND) superfamily is found only in Gram-negative bacteria. RND transporters are composed of a tripartite complex: an inner membrane protein, periplasmic membrane fusion protein (MFP) and an outer membrane protein (OMF). This arrangement facilitates efflux across both the inner and outer membrane, thereby conferring broad spectrum resistance to the cell (Wiggins, 2004; Zhao et al., 2021). These transporters are usually chromosomally encoded and are expressed constitutively in wild-type cells (Lomovskaya and Watkins, 2001; Wiggins, 2004; Elnasser et al., 2021). Of the multiple RND transporters, the tripartite drug efflux complexes AcrAB-TolC and MexAB-OprM from Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa respectively, have been extensively studied (Li et al., 2015; Venter et al., 2015; Blanco et al., 2016; Cacciotto et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2021). AcrAB-TolC is composed of three essential components: Homotrimeric protein AcrB which is embedded in the inner membrane and pumps out diverse substances using a proton gradient as an energy source, TolC a homotrimeric membrane protein with long cylindrical-like structure that provides conduit across the outer membrane, and AcrA which is a periplasmic adaptor protein that connects AcrB and TolC (Vargiu et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2017). Similar to E. coli, plant pathogens in the order Enterobacterales use EP to protect the cell against the chemical environment. Such an example is Pectobacterium brasiliense, a Gram-negative plant-pathogen of the Pectobacteriaceae, a family of multiple genera that cause bacterial soft rot and blackleg diseases, leading to plant tissue maceration and finally wilting and collapse of the entire infected plant tissue (Lu et al., 2021; Oulghazi et al., 2021). Pectobacteriun along with Dickeya are distributed worldwide and ranked among the top 10 list of significant bacterial pathogens in agricultural ecosystems, based on their economic importance (Czajkowski et al., 2011; Mansfield et al., 2012; van der Wolf, 2021). Barabote et al. (2003) reported a role for tolC of Erwinia chrysanthemi (now Dickeya chrysanthemi) in survival and colonization of the pathogen in plant tissues, by protecting the bacterium from antimicrobial compounds produced by plants (Barabote et al., 2003). Similarly, AcrAB was shown as an essential component in conferring tolerance to apple phytoalexins in the fire blight pathogen Erwinina amylovora. Indeed, mutation in acrB significantly increased the pathogen’s sensitivity and attenuated its virulence (Burse et al., 2004). Comprehensive analysis of different RND efflux pumps in E. chrysanthemi revealed two Acr-like systems and two Emr-like systems (Maggiorani Valecillos et al., 2006). RND superfamily proteins have also been reported in other Gram-negative plant associated bacteria such as Agrobacterium tumefaciens, the nitrogen-fixing symbiont Rhizobium etli, Bradyrhizobium japonicum and Burkholderia glumae (Burse et al., 2004; Al-karablieh et al., 2009; Vargas et al., 2011). Complete genome sequence of P. brasiliense (Pb1692) has been published, with two annotated genes for acrB (GT391_RS01465 and GT391_RS15000) (Liu and Filiatrault, 2020). Taking the on-going interactions between plants and pathogens to the next level, plants have developed a host of efflux pump inhibitors (EPIs). These were demonstrated to enhance the antibacterial potency of selected plant-derived and other compounds, to expand their spectrum of activity, to reduce the rates of resistance development and to reverse resistance (Lomovskaya and Watkins, 2001; Lomovskaya and Bostian, 2006; Opperman and Nguyen, 2015; Venter et al., 2015; Lamut et al., 2019). Following these previous reports, in this work we aimed to increase the activity of existing antibacterial compounds, including known plant defense molecules, by targeting AcrB of Pb 1692. To this end, we assessed the antibacterial activity of selected phytochemicals [phloretin (Pht), naringenin (Nar), carvacrol, salicyclic and p-coumaric acids] in the absence and presence of several known EPIs, namely, Phe-Arg β-naphthylamide (PAβN), 1-(1-naphthylmethyl) piperazine (NMP), berberine, and quinoline and found a synergistic activity between the EPI PAβN and the phytochemicals Pht and Nar. The experimental results were supported and explained by molecular docking simulations.