1. Introduction Foodborne diseases have been posing enduring societal and economic challenges worldwide. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), foodborne diseases are estimated to cause 600 million illnesses and 420,000 deaths every year, making them a major cause of morbidity and mortality globally [1,2]. These illnesses and deaths have a substantial impact on individuals, families, communities, broader society, as well as the global economy. In addition to the human distress caused by these diseases, they also have impactful influences on the food supply chain [2]. Therefore, effective prevention, control, and management of foodborne diseases remain a critical public health priority. Bongkrekic acid (BKA) is a potent respiratory toxin, which could significantly impair mitochondrial ATP/ADP exchange and has been implicated in numerous outbreaks of fatal food poisoning. It is classified as a flavorless, odorless, colorless, thermally stable, and highly unsaturated methoxy tricarboxylic acid [3]. Previous research has demonstrated that BKA is produced by Burkholderia gladioli pv. cocovenenans in natural conditions seeing that the BKA biosynthesis gene cluster (bon) exists in the gene repertoire of this bacterium [4,5,6]. Although the biosynthesis and pathogenesis of BKA are unique in many ways, the bacterium of B. gladioli pv. cocovenenans is prevalently distributed globally as it has been extensively isolated and identified in various food and environmental samples, such as water and soil, from all five most populated continents [7,8]. Results also indicated that many cultivated food ingredients, such as Tremella fuciformis (white wood ear mushroom), can be contaminated with B. gladioli pv. cocovenenans [9,10]. Since 1975, more than 3000 cases of BKA toxication have been officially documented with a remarkably high case-fatality rate (40–60%). Although a significant amount of previous BKA outbreaks occurred in Java, Indonesia, reports indicated that recent cases widely spread around in Africa, China, and Southeast Asia [3,6,11] (Table 1). A recent outbreak in Northeast China caused nine deaths, which has a case-fatality rate of 100% [12]. The toxicity of BKA relies on its occupation of a substrate binding site of mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier to inhibit the activity of the carrier [13]. Considering the structural conservativity of mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier in eukaryotic organisms, the toxicity of BKA is most likely universal across human and mammalian species. Previous research showed that BKA-contaminated diet can lead to the death of mice, dogs, and rhesus monkeys within 35 h [14,15]. Studies on oral administration have indicated LD50 value ranges of 1–3.16 mg/kg for human and 0.68–6.84 mg/kg for mice, respectively, while another study revealed that rats were able to survive an oral dose of 10 mg/kg of BKA, whereas a dose of 20 mg/kg was proved to be lethal [3,16]. Since the first report of a BKA outbreak in 1895, B. gladioli pv. cocovenenans contamination and BKA poisoning have been associated with a broad range of food products [23]. These food products include rice noodle [20], fermented beverages [7], fermented coconut (tempe bongkrèk) [24], rehydrated wood ear mushrooms (Tremella spp. and Auricularia heimuer) [9], fermented corn flour [12], fermented grains (glutinous rice, japonica rice, and corn), and sweet potato flour [3,23,25] (Table 1). It is understandable that the production and accumulation of BKA in B. gladioli pv. cocovenenans requires appropriate conditions for bacterial population proliferation, functional gene expression, and metabolite enzymatic biosynthesis [26,27]. The desired conditions for BKA production have been detected as near-neutral pH (6.5–8.0), mild temperature (22–30 °C), low NaCl concentration (lower than 2%), and suitable fatty acid composition (oleic acid rich), and these requirements can be accommodated by some fermented and rehydrated food matrices [9,14,28,29]. Any food-related microbiological studies are built upon pure-culture and co-culture experiments between microbes and food matrices. Nevertheless, most of such culture studies on B. gladioli pv. cocovenenans fermentation and BKA production were conducted decades ago [9,29,30]. The current detection method for BKA relies on high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-based instrumental analysis, whereas real-time PCR techniques are primarily employed to detect the presence of the bon gene cluster, which is employed to verify the existence of B. gladioli pv. cocovenenans [4,31,32,33]. While these analyses have no problem generating scientific results and unveiling underlying mechanisms, it is important to consider their suitability for in situ and routine food production inspections, owing to the high cost and technical requirements associated with these assays. One conventional method of preventing BKA is to have a better manufacturing practice and quality control of these high-risk foods. However, to further enhance the effectiveness of these measures, additional efforts may be required [7]. Furthermore, emerging challenges such as climate change and the acceleration of antibiotic resistance pose significant threats to the food industry. These challenges can substantially increase the uncertainty of foodborne pathogens and diseases, making it even more crucial to implement effective preventive measures to safeguard consumer safety [34,35]. As a threat that is largely unnoticed by the general public while repeatedly proven to be lethal and difficult to detect, B. gladioli pv. cocovenenans contamination and BKA poisoning pose a legitimate hazard to consumers and could demolish their confidence in certain aspects of food consumption [36]. This review delves into the multifaceted research topic of BKA and B. gladioli pv. cocovenenans, aiming to provide valuable insights and a comprehensive blueprint to combat this persistent yet rising threat to public health.