1. Introduction The production of secondary metabolites (SMs) is one of the most prominent biochemical attributes of filamentous fungi (or moldy fungi, or molds), and has stimulated extensive research on these microorganisms since the 1950s [1,2,3]. As a result of this, numerous compounds have been discovered, some of which are capable of harming human health, while others are able to heal people [4,5,6,7]. In parallel with the emergence of new knowledge about the effects of these low-molecular-weight compounds on the human body and the deciphering of their structures, investigations have been carried out that aim to study the mechanism of action at the cellular level [8]. For example, targets for the main classes of antibiotics have been identified, and the mechanisms for the emergence of resistance in microorganisms against these drugs have been established [9,10,11,12,13,14]. In the late 1980s, in light of the emergence of the era of genetic engineering, the molecular basis of the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites began to be studied [15]. In particular, the so-called biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) responsible for the biosynthesis of the corresponding SMs were discovered [16,17]. This knowledge made it possible to apply the strategy of reverse genetics, i.e., going from gene to trait/phenotype, and search for an appropriate product for “silent” or so-called “orphan” BGCs [18,19,20]. Currently, there are various techniques for such genome-mining of BGCs [15,21,22,23,24,25]. Emerging knowledge about biosynthetic gene clusters for the production of secondary metabolites, as well as a lot of difficulties associated with the “awakening” of silent BGCs, have led to the understanding, in numerous studies, of the existence of a complex regulatory system for them [26,27,28,29]. Such regulation operates in concert at several levels, starting with cluster-specific regulators, transcription factors whose genes cluster within a particular BGC and regulate the expression of the same BGC, ending with global regulators and chromatin-mediated regulation [30,31,32,33]. Due to the presence of such a system of regulation, there is a relationship between the production of SMs and the development of fungi [34]. The production of the corresponding SMs occurs at certain stages of the development of the fungus; for example, the synthesis of pigments occurs after the transition from the growth phase (trophophase) to the production phase (idiophase) [35]. On the other hand, most fungal BGCs are silent under normal physiological conditions and begin to work after receiving an appropriate environmental signal that affects the regulatory system [36,37,38]. Composite pleiotropic events accompanying the functioning of the fungal secondary metabolism are currently being studied using complex, including multi-omics, approaches [39,40,41]. The existing fundamental knowledge of the biosynthesis and regulation of SMs in filamentous fungi is extremely important, since, based on natural isolates, over the past 70–80 years, numerous industrial producers of pharmaceutically significant drugs, such as antibiotics, statins, and immunosuppressants, have been created [2,42,43,44]. Numerous works are also underway to create strains-producers of antitumor drugs that are synthesized in fungi [45]. Such industrial producers have been obtained as a result of the so-called classical strain improvement (CSI) methods associated with random mutagenesis and screening for the production of targeted SMs [46,47]. Modern knowledge about the organization of the regulatory machinery of secondary metabolism in the fungal cell makes it possible to understand the molecular basis of the direction of mutational selection, leading to high-yield production of the target secondary metabolite [48]. To achieve this, the original wild-type strains and improved producers are compared at the reference points of improvement programs [49]. Understanding the changes that have taken place is important for the development of future approaches to the targeted genetic engineering of high-yielding fungal producers of SMs [50,51]. Numerous reviews published by highly qualified researchers on the topic of secondary metabolites have taken their rightful place in the classification [1,5,15,30,40,52,53,54,55,56]. However, it is becoming increasingly difficult to grasp such knowledge from various points of view, starting with the structures of molecules, the organization of biosynthetic gene clusters, and their regulation at various levels. And this gap between the volume of formal numerical volumes of knowledge and the possibility of their perception by a person will increase if they are not classified or ordered (packed) in a model. In this review, an attempt is made to communicate knowledge related to the functioning and regulation of secondary metabolism in filamentous fungi, as well as that related to the key changes that occur when they are improved via classical methods [48,49,57,58,59]. For a more visual perception of these processes, the model “regulation of the secondary metabolism of filamentous fungi according to the piano principle” is proposed. This model aims to simplify the understanding of the numerous and complex processes of the signaling and regulation of the biosynthesis of SMs in filamentous fungi and their changes in high-yielding industrial producers. To achieve this, at the associative level, the processes occurring in the fungal cell after the corresponding signal and leading to the production of one secondary metabolite or another are compared with the impact, in which the corresponding sound is extracted after pressing a specific piano key.