1. Introduction Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a current significant issue in global public health. Its severity has heightened due to the excessive and inappropriate use of antimicrobial agents in humans, animals, and plants and insufficient infection prevention measures. This contributes to the emergence of new and resistant microorganisms in the environmental habitat. In 2019, there were 1.27 million deaths attributable to bacterial antimicrobial resistance. Unfortunately, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was among the top pathogens responsible for mortality associated with antimicrobial resistance [1]. The prediction indicates a potential increase to 10 million annual deaths by 2050 with a projected economic impact of USD 100 trillion [2]. Due to the natural evolutionary process, organisms develop genetic mutations to withstand lethal selection pressures. AMR is inevitable and bacteria will inherently adapt and exhibit defensive mechanisms as long as antibacterial agents are utilized against them. Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) exhibits the capacity to cause significant infections and resistance to various antibacterial medications. S. aureus has the ability to adapt to both its human host and the environment, becoming resistant to antibiotics. It is a prominent causative microorganism of endocarditis, bacteremia, osteomyelitis, and skin and soft tissue infections. Each of these conditions has the potential to result in sepsis eventually. After the introduction of the first semi-synthetic anti-staphylococcal penicillins around 1960, the emergence of MRSA was observed within 1 year of their clinical application [3]. Resistance to methicillin in S. aureus is due to the existence of the mecA (or mecC) gene, which is responsible for encoding the penicillin-binding protein PBP2a. This protein exhibits reduced affinity for semi-synthetic penicillins [4]. The World Health Organization (WHO) has categorized MRSA as a high-priority concern, highlighting the urgent need to develop antimicrobial agents for clinical situations. The golden era of antibiotics is fading due to the lack of discovery of new classes of antibiotics leading to the transition into a “post-antibiotics” era. This transition means a lack of effective drugs for antimicrobial-resistance treatment. Therefore, the discovery of new antimicrobial agents for treating infectious diseases caused by MRSA is very urgent. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are present in every kingdom of life and they are an essential element of host defense mechanisms. AMPs represent a category of short-chain peptides, typically comprising amino acids ranging from 12 to 50 residues. Discovered in 1939 from Bacillus brevis, gramicidin was the first AMP exhibiting antibacterial effectiveness against various Gram-positive bacteria in clinical uses [5,6]. AMPs are commonly amphiphilic and possess a high cationic nature. The physicochemical properties of AMPs play a crucial role in their antimicrobial activity. Certain AMPs show the ability to kill bacteria without affecting membrane integrity. These AMPs directly enter bacterial cells, disrupting crucial cellular functions, such as DNA replication, transcription, translation, protein folding, and the process of cell division [7]. The drug resistance to AMPs resulting from genetic mutations has a low probability due to the difficulty of cell membrane alteration and the versatile mechanisms of AMPs. Consequently, the development of drug resistance by bacteria is more difficult for AMPs compared to antibiotics [8]. Numerous peptides sourced from the marine environment have been isolated and proven to be promising compounds for drug candidates due to their unique molecular mechanisms of action [9]. Interestingly, the search for potential bacteria capable of producing antibiotics has transitioned from land-based strains to marine microorganisms. The high-stress and complicated marine environments, such as salt concentrations, pressure, temperature, oxygen concentrations, and radiation exposure, stimulate bacteria to produce compounds distinct from those found in terrestrial counterparts [10]. This research aimed to derive potential AMP-producing bacteria from mangrove sediment, along with their genomic information. The obtained AMP was purified and characterized before determining its antibacterial activity and chemical structure.