1. Introduction Surfactin is a lipopeptide biosurfactant with a cyclic structure composed of seven amino acid residues (both L- and D-amino acids) connected to a long β-hydroxyl fatty acid chain (usually C13−C15) by a lactone bond, making it an amphiphilic molecule [1,2,3]. Due to its strong ability to reduce interfacial tension between oil and water, surfactin is used to reduce the emulsification and viscosity of crude oil for enhanced oil recovery in the petroleum extraction industry [4,5,6]. Moreover, it can be effectively applied in cosmetics in the form of solvents, soaps and facial cleansers due to its emulsification, washing, foaming, solubilisation, wetting, penetration, dispersion and low toxicity characteristics [7,8]. The long-chain fatty acid of surfactin can penetrate into the interior of cell membranes, causing dissolution and damage, which is the basis for its antibacterial activity [9,10]. Surfactin can also break down viral lipid membranes, and it has antiviral properties [11]. Therefore, it can be applied as a biological preservative to effectively control the growth of harmful microorganisms in food [12], and it may prevent fungal infections and skin diseases [13]. In addition, it has broad application prospects in the agricultural field [14], such as controlling apple scab [15]. Currently, the main production methods for surfactin include chemical synthesis and microbial fermentation, with the latter favoured due to superior environmental friendliness and biocompatibility. However, low productivity of surfactin remains an important limiting factor in its industrial production [16,17]. For instance, combinatorial metabolic engineering of Bacillus subtilis ATCC 21332, including enhanced nitrate reduction, fatty acid hydroxylation, rational transporter engineering and feeding, yielded 14.4 g/L of surfactin, with the productivity of 0.6 g/L/h, the highest reported productivity to date [18]. Therefore, the development of microbial cell factories is crucial for its overproduction. Surfactin was first discovered in the fermentation broth of B. subtilis in 1968, with four isomers identified [19]. Moreover, B. subtilis, a model Gram-positive bacterium, grows fast and is easy to cultivate. It has excellent expression systems with good genetic stability, excellent protein secretion ability, no strong codon preferences and mature gene modification technologies. It has been recognised by the USA Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a ‘Generally Recognised as Safe’ (GRAS) strain [20]. Therefore, B. subtilis is commonly used as a chassis for producing surfactin through metabolic engineering [18,21,22]. In B. subtilis, the biosynthesis of surfactin mainly involves the synthesis and structural assembly of precursors (fatty acids and amino acids). B. subtilis synthesises the corresponding precursors through primary metabolism, such as glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, protein metabolism, lipid metabolism and other pathways (Figure 1). The assembly of surfactin is then catalysed by a non-ribosomal peptide synthase (NRPS) system, which includes initiation, peptide chain extension, cyclisation and release [23,24]. The NRPS, also known as surfactin synthase, is a multi-domain protein composed of multiple modules, including the SrfAA, SrfAB, SrfAC and SrfAD subunits. They are encoded by srfAA, srfAB, srfAC and srfAD, respectively, together forming the 27 kb srfA operon [24]. Transcription of the srfA operon is regulated by the quorum sensing system ComQXPA, and phosphorylated ComA binds to a specific region of its promoter, activating its transcription [25,26,27]. In addition, downstream of the srfA operon, there is a phosphopantetheinyl transferase (PPTase) gene sfp that is essential for surfactin synthesis, which functions to activate surfactin synthase [28]. However, sfp is an inactive pseudogene in wild-type B. subtilis 168, which cannot synthesise surfactin. Wu et al., (2019) integrated the sfp gene from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens MT45 into the genome of B. subtilis 168 at the same locus, resulting in a surfactin titre of 400 mg/L [21]. Subsequently, biofilm formation-related genes were knocked out, potential self-resistance associated proteins were overexpressed, the branched-chain fatty acid biosynthesis pathway was engineered, comQXPA from B. amyloliquefaciens MT45 was overexpressed and the global transcriptional regulator gene codY was knocked out, resulting in a surfactin titre of 12.8 g/L [21]. Wang et al., (2019) integrated sfp from B. amyloliquefaciens DSM7 into the ydeO (encoding an unknown protein) locus of the genome of B. subtilis 168, resulting in a surfactin titre of 450 mg/L [29]. The clustered regularly interspersed short palindromic repeat interference (CRISPRi) technology was used to inhibit the expression of L-glutamate racemase genes yrpC and racE, resulting in a surfactin titre of 750 mg/L [29]. Hu et al., (2020) integrated sfp from Bacillus velezensis BS-37 into the genome of B. subtilis 168 at the same locus, resulting in a surfactin titre of 982 ± 98 mg/L [30]. Medium-chain acyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP) thioesterase (encoded by bte) and fatty acyl CoA ligase (encoded by yhfL) were overexpressed, and acyl-CoA dehydrogenase gene fadE was knocked out, resulting in a surfactin titre of 2203 mg/L, with xylose as the carbon source [30]. However, there have been no studies on the overexpression of endogenous active sfp in B. subtilis 168. In addition, the efflux of surfactin is an important factor limiting its synthesis. Overexpression of three putative lipopeptide transporters genes: yerP (endogenous), ycxA and krsE (heterologous) in B. subtilis THY-7 resulted in a 145%, 89% and 52% increase in surfactin production, respectively [31], and overexpression of endogenous yerP in B. subtilis 168 resulted in a 35.3% increase in surfactin production [21], demonstrating that YerP acts as the major surfactin exporter. Research by Xia et al., (2024) showed that preprotein translocase SecA, signal recognition particle receptor FtsY and cell division ATP-binding protein FtsE are also involved in the transport of surfactin in B. subtilis ATCC 21332 [18]. The present study used B. subtilis 168 as the parent strain. To facilitate gene knockout or integrated expression [32], strain BS168N integrated with Para-neo on the genome was employed. Firstly, the excess T base of endogenous sfp was removed, and the modified gene was integrated into the genome of BS168N for overexpression. The resulting recombinant strain was fermented and surfactin synthesis assessed. Next, plipastatin synthase gene ppsD and phosphotransferase gene yvkC were knocked out to reduce the consumption of amino acids, hydroxy fatty acids and ATP, and their effects on surfactin synthesis were investigated. Thirdly, endogenous yerP, ycxA and predicted surfactin transporter gene yfiS were integrated into the same locus of the genome for overexpression, and their effects on surfactin secretion were evaluated. Fourthly, the native promoter of the srfA operon was replaced in situ by constitutive promoters, and codY was knocked out, so their impacts on the transcriptional level of the srfA operon and surfactin synthesis were explored. Finally, the final recombinant strain was subjected to fed-batch fermentation, and strain growth and surfactin production were measured.