1. Introduction The human body is colonized by trillions of microbial species collectively known as the human microbiota [1]. Gut microbes exceed 95% of the entire microbiota, and are considered the most diverse microbial ecosystem on earth [2,3]. The proximity of the commensal gut microbes to the local immune cells in the gut enabled them to undergo co-evolution [4,5], leading to the development of multiple strategies to regulate the immune system [6,7,8,9,10]. These strategies involve the modulation of gut permeability [11], the secretion of specialized molecules [12], and the control of host gene expression [13]. For example, Lactobacillus species modulate the immune system through the production of lactic acid, which suppresses the expression of NF-κB, TNF-α, and other cytokines [14,15]. L. salivarius and L. fermentum modulate the expression of miRNA-155 and 233 to increase the integrity of mucosa, thus preventing leaky gut [16]. L. casei maintains TH17/Treg balance, leading to a reduction in proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 [17]. L. rhamnosus produces Lectin-GR-1, a surface protein that upregulates anti-inflammatory cytokines while simultaneously mediating proper adhesion of Lactobacilli to the epithelial cells, which block pathogen entry and colonization [18]. In addition, L. rhamnosus upregulates the genes responsible for mucin production, and thus improves intestinal barrier function, preventing leaky gut and decreasing inflammation [19]. L. acidophilus regulates TH17/Treg balance, leading to the suppression of proinflammatory mediators, such as IL-12, IL-6, IL-17, and IL-22, and the induction of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 [20,21]. In addition, Lactobacillus species also promote the growth of other immunomodulatory microbes, including Rosburia and Ruminococcus [22]. In addition to their immunomodulatory role, many species of Lactobacilli produce a wide range of antimicrobial metabolites, such as acids, hydrogen peroxides, and antimicrobial peptides, as previously reviewed [23]. Figure 1 illustrates some of the immunomodulatory mechanisms of Lactobacillus species. The increase in data linking Lactobacillus depletion to the onset and progression of several inflammatory diseases has fueled interest in their potential use as probiotics to supply missing functions and restore a healthy balance to microbial communities. However, there are possible adverse reactions to the use of probiotics, including interactions with existing microbes, such as via horizontal gene transfer [24]. Probiotics can also result in unexpected interactions with the host. For example, E. coli Nissle 1917, one of the first probiotics, encodes a gene cluster for the synthesis of colibactin, which has been linked to colorectal cancer [25]. Moreover, probiotics might fail to establish long-term colonization due to competition with indigenous bacteria [26]. Another promising approach involves fecal transplantation to control infectious and inflammatory conditions, such as pseudomembranous colitis, which results from recurrent infection with C. difficile. However, this approach is not without challenges, especially regarding safety concerns related to retracting antibiotic-resistant bugs and the unexpected long-term impacts [27]. Alternatively, identifying the chemical mediators of microbiome function is an appealing strategy that could impact the development of microbiome-based therapeutics and could be fully evaluated, tested, and optimized. The aim of this study was to identify functional secreted molecules from the gut microbiota that have the potential for development as drugs for the treatment of inflammatory and/or infectious diseases. This study also aimed to develop a strategy to identify these chemical mediators based on computational and experimental protocols. We report the discovery of lactomodulin, a unique peptide produced by the L. casei subspecies rhamnosus. Lactomodulin exhibits a potent anti-inflammatory effect in suppressing proinflammatory mediators, including IL-8, IL-6, IL-1B, and TNF-α in the Caco-2 cell line, with minimal cytotoxicity. Further investigation of lactomodulin reveals its antimicrobial activity against several human pathogens, including the antibiotic-resistant strains methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VRE). Our findings highlight the microbiome’s potential in the advancement of drug discovery and development.