1. Introduction The gut microbiota are mutually restricted and interdependent according to a certain proportion, showing a dynamic ecological balance as a whole. Intestinal flora can be divided into symbiotic bacteria, conditional pathogenic bacteria and pathogenic bacteria. As the main body of intestinal flora, they have a relatively fixed and stable state and reside in the intestine to jointly maintain the homeostasis of the body [1,2]. Research shows that the composition of intestinal flora changes with dietary intake, and the types of bacteria vary among people of different ages [3,4]. The composition of intestinal flora is also affected by host genetics [5], antibiotic use [6], lifestyle [7] and concomitant diseases [8,9]. Circadian rhythms refer to the continuous changes in the life activities of organisms with a cycle of about 24 h. Among them, the circadian oscillator is the central mechanism driving the circadian rhythm, which can keep the biological rhythm relatively consistent with the circadian rhythm. The generation of circadian rhythm is mainly regulated by the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and the biological-clock gene in the peripheral tissues [10]. In mammals, the circadian-rhythm axis is composed of the retina, SCN and pineal gland. Their interactions can produce and regulate physiological and behavioral rhythms in the organism. Among them, the SCN, also known as the circadian-rhythm pacemaker, plays a dominant role in the circadian rhythm, which can control the physiological and behavioral rhythms of the organism. At the same time, the peripheral-biological-clock system (mainly including muscle, adipose tissue, liver and intestine) also participates in regulating the circadian rhythm [11]. The biological-clock gene refers to the gene that can control the biological rhythm of organisms. It does not only regulate the sleep cycle and cognitive function of mammals, but also regulates most of their circadian-rhythm cycles in physiological conditions [12]. A large number of studies have shown that the patterns of exercise and diet have a certain degree of impact on intestinal flora, as well as on the immune system and metabolic system of the human body. Depending on the different metabolic states of the host (normal individuals [13], diabetes [14], obesity [15], hypertension [16], anxiety and cognitive impairment [17]), exercise can have different positive effects on the intestinal flora to promote host health. Studies have shown that the circadian-rhythm oscillation between the activity of the immune system and the function of the immune system is consistent, and that an imbalance in the biological clock will lead to the abnormal response of the immune system. The circadian rhythm plays an important role in the physiological metabolism of the body, and the activity of the intestinal flora also participates in the metabolic process of its host [18,19]. In addition to effective weight loss, fasting can also reduce blood pressure, blood lipid level, improve brain health, enhance immunity, improve intestinal health and enhance circadian rhythm [20]. Fasting can reduce fat deposition, improve glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity, as well as significantly improve the hyperglycemia and pancreatic island function of early diabetes patients, and can also have preventive and therapeutic effects on type 2 diabetes. In addition, fasting can also extend the life of mice [21], improve insulin sensitivity, and reduce fasting blood glucose and total cholesterol without losing weight [22]. This paper discusses the effects of diet and exercise on intestinal flora and the immune and metabolic systems from the perspective of circadian rhythm, so as to provide an effective way for the prevention of immune and metabolic diseases (Figure 1).