1. Introduction Endophytes are special microorganisms that live within plants with no obvious symptoms and establish interactions with plants ranging from mutualism to pathogenicity [1]. Some researchers have tended to define the term ‘endophytes’ as referring only to the habitat of the organisms and not to their functions, i.e., all microorganisms that colonize in the internal tissues of plants for all or part of their life [2]. Endophytes, as important cooperative partners of the host plants during their growth and development, have a major impact on the physiological metabolism of the host plant, which helps or stimulates the host plant to defence stresses [3]. Many studies have shown that endophytes are repositories of bioactive metabolites with pharmacological activities, such as antimicrobial, antitumour, antibiotic, antioxidant, and immunological agents [4]. The exploration of them has become a hot spot as the interaction between endophytes and the host plant is gradually being uncovered. Therefore, it is of great value to elucidate the interactive mechanism between plants and endophytes in order to explore and unlock the potential application of endophytes. Endophytes can colonize the host plant in a manner similar to that of pathogen invasion [5], and host plants can synthesize a variety of stress–induced metabolites to defend themselves against stress. In recent years, the theory of balanced antagonism has emerged as a more accurate explanation of the interaction between the host plant and endophytes [6]. According to this theory, endophytes possess virulence factors that confer self−resistance to toxic metabolites of the host [7,8]. Asymptomatic colonization is a balance of antagonisms between plants and endophytes. When endophytic virulence and plant defence are in equilibrium, the endophyte manages to grow in the host plant and remains asymptomatic or avirulent [7,9]. However, the plant–endophyte interaction is not simply a balance between virulence and defence, and the regulatory network or mechanisms are much more complex [10]. Grapes (Vitis vinifera L.), as the most widely cultivated fruit in the world for the production of table fruit, dried fruit, juice, and wine, harbour diverse microorganisms, including fungal endophytes, some of which contribute to the terroir that defines the qualities and characteristics of grapes and wines [11,12]. With a full understanding of how grape metabolism responds to fungal endophyte colonization, it is important to adapt agricultural practices in viticulture and then improve the resulting products, such as wine. In recent years, the application of omics technology has gradually revealed the interactions between grapevines and endophytes or pathogens. Zhang et al. [13] investigated the interaction of grapevine green shoots with the fungal pathogen Lasiodiplodia theobromae at three different time points and integrated differential expression genes (DEGs) involved in biotic stress responses, such as plant–pathogen interaction, hormone signalling, and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathways. After inoculation with downy mildew Plasmopara viticola at four different time points, genes related to the synthesis of defense–related metabolites, such as phenylpropanoid, stilbenoid, and flavonoid biosynthesis genes, were activated in ‘Shuanghong’ grapevine leaves during the early stages of infection [14]. Similar results have also been reported on the mechanisms underlying the interaction between grapevines and the pathogenic fungi Plasmopara viticola, identifying resistance genes and pathways involved in signalling, as well as an induction of the basal immune response and the terpene metabolism [15]. Transcriptomic and metabolic analyses revealed the interaction between the grape berries and the Botrytis cinerea pathogen, and DEGs related to the monolignol, flavonoid, and stilbenoid biosynthetic pathways were significantly induced in the berries [16]. All of the above results were mainly related to grapevine–pathogen interactions; whether the colonization of fungal endophytes in grapevine without causing obvious symptoms leads to reprogramming of the host plant metabolism triggered in response to the defence mechanism has been scarcely reported. In our previous study, we analysed the different responses after 6 h, 6 d, and 15 d of inoculation with fungal endophytes Epicoccum layuense R2-21 (Epi R2-21) and Alternaria alternata XHYN2 (Alt XHYN2), at the transcriptomic level of tissue–cultured grapevine seedlings of the cultivar ‘Cabernet Sauvignon’ (Vitis vinifera L. cv., the wine grape cultivar cultivated worldwide) [17], and the results showed that grapevine genes were greatly regulated in response to Epi R2-21 and Alt XHYN2 inoculation, resulting in the reprogramming of genes related to the secondary metabolite profile. However, it is unclear whether these responses represent cultivar– or genus–specific differences in the cultivar ‘Cabernet Sauvignon’ or common effects in different grapevine cultivars. To validate these effects, in the present work, we further investigated the effects of the same fungal endophytes on tissue–cultured grapevine seedlings of the cultivar ‘Rose Honey’ (Vitis vinifera L. × Vitis labrusca L., the wine grape cultivar grown in Yunnan Province, China), and compared the responses at the transcriptomic level in seedlings with the fungal endophytes Epi R2-21 and Alt XHYN2 to study serial changes in the gene profiles altered after 6 h, 6 d, and 15 d inoculation, providing insights into the interactions between fungal endophyte and grapevine at the early and later stages.