Introduction Polyketides constitute an important family of structurally diverse natural products, which include many clinically useful drugs such as the antibiotics erythromycin and tetracycline, anticancer epothilone, and the anti-hypercholesterolemia lovastatin. The pharmaceutical values of many polyketides have led to intense efforts in recent decades toward understanding and engineering the corresponding biosynthetic pathways. These concerted efforts from several disciplines, such as biochemistry, structural biology, genetics, and metabolic engineering, have enabled many examples of rational and combinatorial biosynthesis of “unnatural” natural products, as well as enzymatic tools that can be used in the semisynthesis of natural product-derived targets (Baltz 2006; Weissman and Leadlay 2005; Olano et al. 2009). Polyketides are synthesized by a family of multifunctional enzymes known as polyketide synthases (PKSs). PKSs assemble the core structures (or aglycons) of polyketides via the sequential Claisen-like condensations of extender units derived from caboxylated acyl-CoA precursors, in a head-to-tail fashion (Staunton and Weissman 2001). Based on the structures of the polyketide products, as well as biochemical features of the PKSs, PKSs are currently classified into types I, II, and III subgroups. Type I PKSs are megasynthases in which catalytic domains are typically found in a single polypeptide. A modular type I PKS, such as the 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase (DEBS) (Donadio and Katz 1992), consists of multiple modules and each module catalyzes one round of chain elongation and modification. Linear juxtaposition of modules facilitates unidirectional transfer of the growing polyketide from the upstream to the downstream modules in assembly line-like fashion (Cane et al. 1998). An iterative type I PKS, such as the lovastatin nonaketide synthase (LovB) (Kennedy et al. 1999), is a monomodule megasynthase in which a single set of catalytic domains are used repeatedly in a highly programmed fashion. Type II PKSs (also known as bacterial aromatic PKSs) are composed of mostly dissociated, monofunctional enzymes that function repeatedly in the synthesis of a poly-β-ketone backbone (Hertweck et al. 2007). Type II PKSs are involved in the synthesis of aromatic polyketides, such as the aglycons of actinorhodin (McDaniel et al. 1993) and daunorubicin (Hutchinson 1997). In both type I and II PKSs, the minimal PKS components that are required to perform one round of decarboxylative condensation consist of a β-ketoacylsynthase (KS), an acyltransferase (AT), and a phosphopantethienylated acyl carrier protein (ACP) (Fig. 1). The elongated polyketide product synthesized by the minimal PKS can be tailored by enzymes such as ketoreductase (KR), dehydratase (DH), enoylreductase (ER) or methyltransferase (MT), etc. Type III PKSs, such as chalcone synthase (Austin and Noel 2003), are homodimeric KSs that synthesize smaller aromatic compounds in bacteria, fungi, and plants. Products synthesized by the various types of PKSs can undergo different sets of post-PKS modifications by decorative enzymes encoded in the biosynthetic pathways, such as cyclases, oxygenases, glycosyltransferases, etc., to afford the structurally diverse natural products (Olano et al. 2010).
Fig. 1General mechanisms involved in polyketide biosynthesis. KS ketosynthase, AT acyl transferase, ACP acyl carrier protein, KR ketoreductase, ER enoylreductase, DH dehydratase Fig. 1General mechanisms involved in polyketide biosynthesis. KS ketosynthase, AT acyl transferase, ACP acyl carrier protein, KR ketoreductase, ER enoylreductase, DH dehydratase General mechanisms involved in polyketide biosynthesis. KS ketosynthase, AT acyl transferase, ACP acyl carrier protein, KR ketoreductase, ER enoylreductase, DH dehydratase Polyketides are synthesized mostly by soil-borne or marine actinomycetes bacteria and filamentous fungi. Type III polyketides can also be synthesized by plants. While these organisms can be prolific and impressive natural product chemists, many of them are unfortunately difficult to work with in both laboratory and industrial settings. The difficulties can be attributed to one of more of the following reasons: (1) the strain is difficult to culture (long doubling times) or domesticate; (2) the strain is genetically intractable and refractory toward common molecular biology tools; and (3) the polyketide biosynthetic pathways are weakly expressed or silent under laboratory culturing conditions, resulting in low polyketide titers. To overcome these limitations, one important goal toward engineered biosynthesis of polyketides is the establishment of robust heterologous hosts (Pfeifer and Khosla 2001). The workhorse organism Escherichia coli has emerged to be a useful heterologous host for the reconstitution, manipulation, and optimization of polyketide biosynthesis in recent years. The choice of E. coli is an obvious one from the start due to the (1) ease of culturing and fast growth characteristics; (2) availability of superior genetic tools; (3) well-understood primary metabolism; and (4) the lack of endogenous polyketide pathways that may crosstalk or interfere with transplanted pathways. However, E. coli also has significant drawbacks as a heterologous host, including lack of compatible post-translational enzymes, such as the phosphopantetheinyl transferase that can modify foreign ACPs (Quadri et al. 1998); unavailability of polyketide building blocks; and difficulties in efficient translation and functional folding of key biosynthetic components, such as megasynthases and the P450 family of enzymes. Fortunately, many of these limitations have been addressed in recent years via metabolic engineering, protein engineering, and synthetic biology efforts. As a result, polyketides synthesized by all three types of PKSs have been produced in E. coli. While some compounds are only synthesized at milligram per liter scales, a few complex polyketides have been produced at nearly gram per liter titers after optimization (Murli et al. 2003; Leonard et al. 2008). In addition, using enzymes mined from the biosynthetic pathways, E. coli has also been engineered to be a platform for biocatalytic synthesis of polyketide-based, clinically relevant drugs (Xie et al. 2007). These successes represent important milestones in outfitting E. coli as a powerful host for polyketide biosynthesis, and a few of these examples will be highlighted in this minireview.