Introduction In 1986, Sanada et al. (1) discovered that Streptomyces cattleya is able to produce fluoroacetate (FAc)8 from fluoride. Attempts to elucidate the mechanism of this unusual transformation have led to the discovery of a fluorinase enzyme catalyzing the formation of 5′-fluoro-5′-deoxyadenosine from S-adenosyl-l-methionine and fluoride (2–6). We have cloned the fluorinase gene flA (5) and subsequently identified a gene cluster (fl) surrounding the fluorinase gene from S. cattleya (7). Characterization of the 5′-fluoro-5′-deoxyadenosine phosphorylase (3), the enzyme responsible for the second step of the FAc biosynthesis encoded by the flB gene located next to the flA, has confirmed the involvement of the fl gene cluster in the biosynthesis of FAc (7). In our efforts to further elucidate the functions of the fl gene cluster, the protein encoded by the flK gene located close to the 3′-end of the cluster was characterized as a thioesterase that cleaves fluoroacetyl-coenzyme A (FAcCoA) to produce FAc and CoA. It is noteworthy that acetyl-coenzyme A (AcCoA) is not hydrolyzed by FlK (7). Previous studies have shown that FAc can be used by AcCoA synthase to synthesize FAcCoA, and citrate synthase can catalyze formation of 2-fluorocitrate from FAcCoA and oxaloacetate (8). Lauble et al. (9) have shown that the (−)-erythro diastereomer of 2-fluorocitrate is further converted to 4-hydroxy-trans-aconitate, a lethal competitive inhibitor of aconitase, thereby blocking the tricarboxylic acid cycle. The presence of a FAcCoA-hydrolyzing enzyme that has no effect on the metabolically important intermediate AcCoA may therefore serve as a self-resistance mechanism for the FAc-producing S. cattleya. FlK is homologous to many predicted thioesterases and hypothetical proteins according to protein-protein BLAST searches against a non-redundant protein sequence data base (7). However, none of these putative homologues has a defined function. Two groups of thioesterases have been identified, thioesterases I and thioesterases II, based on differences in their amino acid sequence, protein folds, and catalytic mechanisms. Type I thioesterases have evolved within the α/β-hydrolase fold superfamily and are usually present as a product-releasing domain of multidomain proteins, such as type I fatty acid synthases, polyketide synthases, and nonribosomal peptide synthases. Type I thioesterases use serine or cysteine as the catalytic residue (10, 11). Type II thioesterases are discrete proteins associated with activities of hydrolyzing short- or medium-chain acyl-CoAs and exist either as a homodimer of a single hot dog fold (12) or as a monomer comprising a duplicated hot dog fold (13). It has been shown that the active sites of type II thioesterase enzymes contain either a glutamate or an aspartate residue acting as a general base or nucleophile responsible for the catalytic function (14, 15), although the precise catalytic mechanism has remained controversial. FlK, a discrete protein catalyzing hydrolysis of a short-chain acyl-CoA (fluoroacetyl CoA), apparently belongs to the type II thioesterase family and is therefore expected to have a carboxylic side chain at the active site. Protein sequence alignment analysis has revealed that nine amino acid residues in FlK (Gly8, Thr42, Glu50, Leu61, Gly69, His76, Ala78, Gly83, and Gly116) are all conserved in homologues that have a similar protein size to FlK (ranging from 127 to 180 amino acids). The presence of Thr42 and His76 together with Glu50 among the conserved residues led us to speculate that FlK may employ a variation of the classical catalytic triad-type mechanism with Thr42 (instead of a Ser or a Cys), His76, and Glu50 (instead of an Asp). His76 would then serve as a base to deprotonate Thr42. The deprotonated Thr42-Oγ1 is proposed to act as a nucleophile attacking the fluoroacetyl carbonyl carbon of FAcCoA to initiate the hydrolysis reaction and the carboxylic side chain of Glu50 to neutralize the charge developed on the His76 side chain during the transition state of the reaction by hydrogen bonding with the imidazole nitrogen of His76 (7). Although a hydroxyl derived from threonine rather than from a serine residue has been found to act as the catalytic nucleophile in some proteinases, including the individual activities of the proteosome (16), to the best of our knowledge, no functionally characterized thioesterase has been reported to use threonine in this way. We have carried out site-directed mutagenesis targeting the putative catalytic residues and defined structures by x-ray crystallography of the wild type and mutant FlK proteins both with and without bound analogues of FAcCoA. Our studies provide insights into the catalytic mechanism of FlK and the high substrate specificity of FlK for FAcCoA over the closely related AcCoA.