INTRODUCTION Lymphatic filariasis, also known as elephantiasis, is caused primarily by two related parasites, Brugia malayi and Wuchereria bancrofti, and represents a worldwide health crisis with over 200 million people infected and another 20% of the global population at risk of infection.1 The asparaginyl-tRNA synthetase (AsnRS) in B. malayi is considered an excellent antifilarial target because (i) it is highly expressed in all stages of the parasite life cycle, (ii) it is biochemically and structurally well characterized, and (iii) it shows significant structural differences in comparison to human and other eukaryotic aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases.2–5 As part of a drug discovery program targeting B. malayi AsnRS (BmAsnRS), we recently completed a HTS campaign of ~73,000 microextracts, from a collection of 36,720 microbial strains, for activity against the recombinant BmAsnRS.5 Subsequent bioassay-guided dereplication of two of the active strains resulted in the discovery of two natural product scaffolds, represented by tirandamycin (TAM) B (1) from Streptomyces sp. 179446 and the depsipeptide WS9326D from Streptomyces sp. 9078,7 as promising antifilarial drug leads that kill the adult B. malayi parasites at low nanomolar concentrations yet are not cytotoxic to human hepatic cells. Under the original fermentation condition using the ISP-2 medium, 1 was produced as a minor metabolite of S. sp. 17944. Preliminary fermentation optimization improved 1 production, but still with TAM A (2) as the major metabolite together with TAM E (3), F (4), and G (5) as co-metabolites.6 In this study, we sought out medium optimization to increase 1 titer and to produce 1 as the major metabolite to facilitate the production and isolation of sufficient quantities of 1 for further mechanistic and preclinical studies, in an effort to advance the candidacy of 1 as an antifilarial drug lead. Here we now report (i) the comparison of metabolite profiles of S. sp. 17944 in six different media, (ii) identification of a medium enabling the production of 1 as essentially the sole metabolite and with improved titer, and (iii) isolation and structural elucidation of three new TAM congeners, H (6), I (7), and J (8), shedding new insights into the structure-activity-relationship (SAR) of 1 as a BmAsnRS inhibitor and an antifilarial drug lead.