Introduction Filamentous fungi, such as species found within the genus Aspergillus, are known to produce a wide variety of natural products displaying a broad spectrum of biological activities. Genome sequencing of members in the genus Aspergillus revealed that the number of secondary metabolite (SM) genes or gene clusters greatly exceeds the number of SMs identified so far. This suggests that more types of SMs still remain to be discovered. Efficient and high-throughput genome sequencing techniques have now greatly facilitated the genome mining of SMs identified in Aspergillus species. More and more studies have shown that most fungal SM genes are clustered, often separated from each other by less than 2 kb within the chromosome (Keller et al., 2005). Striking examples of fungal SM clusters include those responsible for the biosynthesis of fumonisin (Proctor et al., 2003) and sterigmatocystin (Brown et al., 1996). The clustering of these SM genes is fortuitous for researchers since upon discovering one responsible gene within a cluster, other genes that are within close proximity of the identified genes may be involved in the biosynthesis of the same natural product. Analysis of the fungal genome makes it feasible to characterize these SM gene clusters via genetic manipulations. Verification of function of the relevant genes can be achieved via several approaches. These approaches include targeted deletion or over-expression of the relevant genes in the native organism, heterologous expression in an alternative host, or in vitro biochemical characterization. Recent advances in the genome editing of Aspergillus nidulans have greatly expedited the SM genome mining of this fungal species (Sanchez et al., 2012). One advance is the development of a fusion PCR technique that allows quick synthesis of linear PCR fragments that are used in the transformation of filamentous fungi (Yu et al., 2004; Szewczyk et al., 2006). Another advance concerns the establishment of an efficient gene targeting system in the fungus A. nidulans. This is accomplished via targeted deletion of the A. nidulans homolog (nkuA) of the human KU70 gene which is essential for non-homologous end joining of DNA in DNA double-strand breaks (Nayak et al., 2006; Szewczyk et al., 2006). Later, this ku70 deletion toolbox was expanded to other Aspergillus species and boosted the gene targeting efficiency in these species (Kuck and Hoff, 2010). The fungus Aspergillus terreus is known to produce lovastatin, which became the first cholesterol-lowering drug of its class approved for human use in the United States. Besides lovastatin, A. terreus produces a number of biologically relevant compounds such as sulochrin, terretonin, asterriquinone, and butyrolactone. The strain A. terreus NIH 2624, a patient isolate, was sequenced by the Broad Institute as part of the Broad Fungal Genome Initiative. A 10 × coverage genome sequence has been completed, and the data are publicly available through the Broad Institute website. Analysis by Secondary Metabolite Unique Regions Finder (SMURF) showed that A. terreus NIH2624 contains 28 polyketide synthase (PKS) genes, 22 non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) genes, one hybrid PKS/NRPS gene, two PKS-like genes, and 15 NRPS-like genes (Khaldi et al., 2010). This review will cover the most current knowledge of the genome mining of SMs produced by A. terreus. The review consists of three major sections: genome mining of PKS-derived natural products, genome mining of NRPS-derived natural products, and genome mining of hybrid PKS-NRPS derived natural products by A. terreus.