Introduction Secondary metabolites (SMs) are low-molecular-mass organic compounds that, unlike primary metabolites, are not directly involved in growth, development or reproduction of the producing organism. Up until 2014 ∼170,000 natural products have been characterized from both marine and terrestrial organisms (Seyedsayamdost and Clardy, 2014; Chapman and Hall, 2015). Microorganisms are able to synthesize a large number of SMs, but the exact number is not known. Furthermore, mining of microbial genomes revealed the presence of numerous SM gene clusters, displaying a discrepancy between the number of putative genes involved in secondary metabolism and the known SMs in a single microbe (Bergmann et al., 2007; Sanchez et al., 2012; Craney et al., 2013). For example, the model fungus Aspergillus nidulans is potentially able to produce 32 polyketides, 14 non-ribosomal peptides and two indole alkaloids (Brakhage et al., 2008; Rank et al., 2010), with little more than 50% of the produced SMs being identified. Furthermore, SMs can be found in diverse environments and even chemical biogeographic distribution maps for biomedically valuable families of natural products in the environment have been created (Charlop-Powers et al., 2014). A number of these compounds have important pharmacological applications and are used as antibiotics/antibacterial drugs (Brakhage, 2013). Unfortunately, antibiotic resistance is spreading faster than the development of new antibiotics. As a consequence, there is the need for a constant provision of new compounds for the antibiotic development pipeline (Bbosa et al., 2014; Nathan and Cars, 2014). This is contrasted with a continuous rise in re-isolation of already known natural products (Strand et al., 2014). To manage this conflict, a more targeted natural product search is necessary. This effort directs SM research incrementally to a deeper understanding of the physiological relevance and ecological significance of SMs. It is generally accepted that in nature a substantial benefit to the SM producers must exist, simply arising from the fact that these very energy consuming biosynthetic pathways were maintained through evolution. An early postulated explanation for the role of SMs in nature was its function to defend the habitats of the producers by inhibiting the growth of its competitors (Davies, 1990; Brakhage et al., 2005; Galán et al., 2013). Another more recent hypothesis postulates an association between epibiotic predation and antibiotic production due to widespread predatory abilities in the genus Streptomyces (Kumbhar et al., 2014). At low, therefore non-inhibitory concentrations, such molecules are believed to function as signaling molecules (Aminov, 2009; Andersson and Hughes, 2014). This is supported by the assumption that over millions of years the evolution of SMs happened because microorganisms used them as chemical signals for communication between cells of the same species, different species (Figure 1) or between host cells, e.g., as endophytes in other microorganisms (Partida-Martinez and Hertweck, 2005) or plants (Brader et al., 2014). FIGURE 1Microorganismic multispecies communities form secondary metabolites that contribute to the stabilization/changes in these companionships. In nature, microorganisms process signals from both abiotic and biotic environments. The latter represent secondary metabolites or natural products whose formation is often suppressed in pure cultures under standard conditions in the laboratory. Microbial mixed cultivation is therefore a suitable means to exploit their potential for natural product discovery and to study the molecular concepts behind the regulatory interactions. Microorganismic multispecies communities form secondary metabolites that contribute to the stabilization/changes in these companionships. In nature, microorganisms process signals from both abiotic and biotic environments. The latter represent secondary metabolites or natural products whose formation is often suppressed in pure cultures under standard conditions in the laboratory. Microbial mixed cultivation is therefore a suitable means to exploit their potential for natural product discovery and to study the molecular concepts behind the regulatory interactions. As reported above, the majority of computationally identified SM gene clusters are silent under standard laboratory growth conditions. Successful methods to induce the formation of new metabolites include genetic engineering (Bergmann et al., 2007), mutagenesis, the OSMAC approach (Bode et al., 2002) or treatment with epigenetic modifiers (Cichewicz, 2010; Nützmann et al., 2011; Brakhage, 2013). In contrast to these classical methods, co-cultivation of bacteria–bacteria, fungi–fungi or of bacteria and fungi represent a naturally driven approach mimicking physiological conditions, involving competition and communication. Furthermore, co-cultures are highly relevant for drug research because they allow not only for the identification of new compounds, but can also monitor drug effects on synthetic microbial consortia. Up to now, various co-cultivation strategies have been applied. A summary with the focus on synthetic biology was given by Goers et al. (2014), while successful strategies with a special emphasis on SM formation in co-culture experiments were recently reviewed by Bertrand et al. (2014b). The regulatory mechanisms of SM biosynthetic gene clusters are poorly understood. Unraveling both production conditions and signal transduction in nature, e.g., by identifying global regulators, will help to understand their function and support new possibilities to further explore SMs. Only a few examples on the gene regulatory network during SM formation in co-cultures have been reported. One is given by the specific interaction between A. nidulans and Streptomyces rapamycinicus. Thereby, activation of a fungal silent gene cluster and production of novel compounds was mediated by manipulating the chromatin-based regulation in the eukaryotic partner by the bacteria (Schroeckh et al., 2009; Nützmann et al., 2011). This review focuses on the communication between microorganisms, which has led to the activation of silent gene clusters and the formation of (novel) SMs by at least one of the involved species. Of particular focus is the bacteria-triggered activation of silent SM gene clusters in fungi and the role of chromatin remodeling in SM formation. Furthermore, methodical perspectives for the analysis of natural products are also discussed.