INTRODUCTION Azinomycin B is a promising antitumor natural product isolated from the soil-dwelling bacteria Streptomyces sahachiroi and Streptomyces griseofuscus (1,2). This new structural class of dual alkylating agents is highly effective against tumor cells by interacting covalently with duplex DNA in the major groove and inducing interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) at 5′-GNC or 5′-GNT sequences (3–5). Due to the damage effects of alkylation and cross-linking (Supplementary Figure S1), DNA replication is interrupted and ultimately cell death occurs. The unprecedented azabicyclic ring system and highly active epoxide moiety in azinomycin B are two primary electrophilic functional groups responsible for the ICL process (6). Covalent ICLs arise from nucleophilic opening of the aziridine at C-10 and the epoxide at C-21 by the N-7 position of purine residues located on the two DNA strands (4,7). In addition, the naphthoate moiety, along with other functional groups within the skeleton of the compound, may also serve to influence the efficiency of ICL formation (8–11). Azinomycin B shows a strong propensity to alkylate guanine nucleosides in the major groove of DNA. On the basis of an average G+C content of 70%, there may be a large number of potentially susceptible target sites within the genome of a streptomycete strain. Obviously, efficient cellular self-protection is crucial for azinomycin B producers to protect themselves from the lethal effects of the compound. Mechanisms of cellular self-protection mainly include target sites modification, drug inactivation, drug binding and export pumps (12). Considering that a single DNA damage is sufficient to cause cell death, multiple modes of resistance determinants are often adopted to ensure efficient self-protection toward a DNA-targeting antibiotic in its producers. For example, two resistance genes, blmA and blmB, were found to protect the bleomycin-producing strain Streptomyces verticillus from DNA damage induced by this cytotoxic agent through drug binding and drug inactivation via acetylation, respectively (13). The important antitumor antibiotic mitomycin C is produced by Streptomyces lavendulae as an inert prodrug that requires enzymatic or chemical reduction to generate a highly effective alkylating agent. Mitomycin self-resistance occurs via three cellular mechanisms: a flavoenzyme (McrA) that oxidizes the active reduced form of mitomycin C (14), a drug binding protein (Mrd) that prevents reductive activation of the prodrug and a membrane-associated protein (Mct) involved in drug efflux (15,16). It is common that antibiotic biosynthetic genes are clustered with resistance and regulator genes. The azinomycin B biosynthetic gene cluster in S. sahachiroi was reported in 2008. Its biosynthetic pathway, however, is still not completely understood. To date, only the enzymatic cascade leading to the formation of the naphthoate moiety has been unequivocally deciphered (17,18). Since many of the proposed enzymes and reactions are novel, cloning and characterization of correlative genes will contribute to the elucidation of molecular mechanisms of its biosynthesis, self-resistance and regulation. Recently, one locus (aziR) far away from the azinomycin B gene cluster was identified to mediate azinomycin resistance in S. sahachiroi. The aziR gene encodes an aminoglycoside phosphotransferase which normally inactivates antibiotics via phosphorylation, but here it behaves as an azinomycin B binding protein conferring azinomycin resistance (19). Here we report the identification of another azinomycin resistance locus (orf1) (GenBank accession number ABY83174) adjacent to the azinomycin B gene cluster. Expression of this gene in azinomycin-sensitive strains and deletion of it in a non-azinomycin-producing strain supported that it is, indeed, essential for survival of the azinomycin-producing strain, S. sahachiroi ATCC33158. Whereafter, the action mechanism of this newly discovered resistance determinant was clearly revealed by a series of in vivo and in vitro experiments.