Introduction A large variety of compounds is produced by various microorganisms by means of specialized biosynthetic pathways. Although the special (or secondary) metabolites (Hopwood, 2007; Baltz, 2008; van Keulen and Dyson, 2014) are not essential for growth and reproduction, they often provide the producing organism with a bioactive role (Keller et al., 2005). Reaching further than a cell itself physically can, the small diffusible molecules may give an advantage to its producer by effectively adapting to extracellular conditions to some degree. They may provide defense (or attack), competition, signaling, or interspecies interactions, depending on the environmental cues, thus increasing the likelihood of survival in an inhospitable environment (Brachmann et al., 2013; Martinez et al., 2017). The bioactivity of the small molecules is mostly achieved by affecting transcription in receiving cells (Camilli and Bassler, 2006). Secondary metabolism is of special interest in Streptomyces, a clade of multicellular bacteria that occupies a high position in the developmental hierarchy of bacteria due to their advanced morphology and physiology. Streptomycetes have evolved a plethora of biosynthetic pathways to produce various secondary metabolites, especially signal molecules (see below), or antibiotics (van Keulen and Dyson, 2014). These compounds provide the organism with a competitive advantage, protection from unfavorable living conditions and/or facilitate interspecies interactions (Maxwell et al., 1989). The genes for the biosynthesis of streptomycete secondary metabolites are mostly clustered and their expression is highly regulated (Bentley et al., 2002; Tanaka et al., 2013). The model S. coelicolor possesses the best annotated genome that encodes biosynthetic pathways for more than 20 secondary metabolites (Bentley et al., 2002). The chemical structure has so far been elucidated in less than 30 percent of the compounds, belonging to the following groups of natural substances: polyketides, pyrones, peptides, siderophores, γ-butyrolactones, butenolides, furans, terpenoids, fatty acids, oligopyrroles, and deoxysugars (van Keulen and Dyson, 2014). The remaining 70 percent are called “cryptic compounds” as they are not produced at standard laboratory conditions (Bentley et al., 2002; Ikeda et al., 2003; Ohnishi et al., 2008; Tanaka et al., 2013; van Keulen and Dyson, 2014). To activate these cryptic pathways, streptomycetes are cultivated under non-standard physical and nutritional conditions or co-cultured with other microorganisms (Wakefield et al., 2017). Genetic manipulations within the genes (Luo et al., 2013) or the transfer of the whole biosynthetic gene cluster into a heterologous producer (Kalan et al., 2013; Tanaka et al., 2013) are also commonly used strategies. The successful activation of the biosynthetic pathways often leads to biosynthesis of previously unknown compounds (Ikeda et al., 2003; Ohnishi et al., 2008; Gomez-Escribano et al., 2012; Tanaka et al., 2013). For example, a polyketide alkaloid, coelimycin P1 (so-called yellow pigment), is produced from the cpk cryptic gene cluster in S. coelicolor (Gomez-Escribano et al., 2012). The complicated development of streptomycetes requires highly sophisticated control mechanisms mediated by multiple molecules linked to signaling cascades (Kelemen and Buttner, 1998; Claessen et al., 2006; Gao et al., 2012). A widely studied signaling system is quorum sensing, in which stimuli are spread within a population and induce appropriate responses (Phelan et al., 2011). Based on the signal assessment, the organism can adapt to its environment and coordinate further development in response to local population densities (Waters and Bassler, 2005). One of the assumptions made in this work is that cellular signaling is also employed in spore germination (see below). However, the nature of the signaling in this developmental phase remains unclear, as do the chemical characteristics and the possible regulatory effect of the produced substances. Streptomyces undergo a cellular differentiation that resembles the fungal life cycle (Seipke et al., 2012). Their growth starts with germinating spores that develop into a vegetative mycelium of branching hyphae. Subsequent development of aerial hyphae is considered to be a cell response to nutrient depletion; most of the secondary metabolites are formed at this developmental stage (Sello and Buttner, 2008; Seipke et al., 2012). The aerial hyphae are dissected into chains of uninucleoid spores. Spores are subjected to maturation which ensures their survival in unfavorable conditions and allows them to spread into new niches. The dormant state of spores is characterized by limited metabolic activity or its complete stagnation (McCormick and Flardh, 2012). Subsequent germination is the spore's transition into a metabolically active vegetative phase. Reactivation of the dormant exospore takes place in an aqueous environment. In addition to energy sources (e.g., trehalose) and various nutrients (Ranade and Vining, 1993), the dormant spores of streptomycetes also contain transcriptome which is a remnant of sporulation and spore maturation (Mikulik et al., 2002). The residual pool of mRNA appears to be necessary for the initial germination phase, serving as a template for the early synthesis of proteins, such as chaperones and hydrolases. Whereas chaperones are indispensable in the re-activation of present proteins upon their release from the trehalose milieu (Bobek et al., 2017), hydrolases reconstitute the thick hydrophobic spore cell wall (Bobek et al., 2004; Haiser et al., 2009). Further development requires the re-activation of the transcriptional apparatus (Paleckova et al., 2006; Mikulik et al., 2008, 2011) controlled by the activity of a set of sigma factors, whose expression takes place from the very beginning of the process (Bobek et al., 2014; Strakova et al., 2014). Genome-wide expression data revealed that the activity of most metabolic pathways is stabilized after the first DNA replication that occurs between 120 and 150 min of germination of S. coelicolor (Bobek et al., 2014). After this period, morphologically observable changes, like the first germ tube emerging from the spore, occur (Kelemen and Buttner, 1998; Claessen et al., 2006; Ohnishi et al., 2008). In the case of non-activated spores, it was found that about 10–20% of spores do not germinate even under optimal incubation conditions (Yoshida and Kobayashi, 1994). Sole spores of S. viridochromogenes have been shown to germinate more slowly than in the dense population (Xu and Vetsigian, 2017). This indicates an existence of germination activator produced into the medium. On the other hand, the extract from the S. viridochromogenes supernatant has been shown to inhibit the germination of unactivated spores when added prior to incubation (Hirsch and Ensign, 1976a). The inhibitor present was later isolated (along with other congeners) and described as germicidin A (Petersen et al., 1993; Aoki et al., 2011; Ma et al., 2017). The launch of germination within a spore population is stochastic, as was shown not only in streptomycetes (Xu and Vetsigian, 2017) but also in other spore-forming bacteria (van Vliet, 2015). The probability of germination within a population differs between different streptomycete strains; S. viridochromogenes and S. granaticolor exhibit fast and robust germination whereas S. coelicolor and S. venezuelae show more complex behavior with a fraction of germlings that stop growing soon after germination (Mikulik et al., 1977; Bobek et al., 2004; Xu and Vetsigian, 2017). Activity of early released compounds, germination activators and inhibitors, may affect the stochasticity of germination in order to adapt the germination strategy to environmental conditions (Petersen et al., 1993; Aoki et al., 2007, 2011; Ma et al., 2017). Since it is considered to be non-productive (Seipke et al., 2012), the initial developmental phase has hitherto not been given sufficient attention. It is nevertheless apparent from the genome-wide expression analysis of S. coelicolor's germinating spores (germlings) performed by Strakova (Strakova et al., 2013), that 163 genes involved in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites are transcribed during germination (including those cryptic). It is for this reason that we chose to focus on the biosynthetic activities of the germinating spores of S. coelicolor in this article. Secondary metabolites produced in this phase would possibly function as germinative signals in the frame of intercellular communication (Rutherford and Bassler, 2012; Brachmann et al., 2013) or may suppress competing microflora.