Introduction Among all soil bacterial genera having a representative described as a Plant-Growth Promoting Microbe (PGPM), the genus Pseudomonas comprise a wide variety of probiotic species, with distinct mechanisms of action that strengthen plant health, either directly or indirectly [1,2]. Several pseudomonads have demonstrated production of different kinds of secondary metabolites involved in antagonism to pathogens, phytostimulation or nutrient supply, and an ability to degrade complex organic compounds, not only being able hence to contribute to plant growth, but also to bioremediation of soils [2–6]. As members of the γ-Proteobacteria subphylum, which range from 1% to 34% of the abundance of total soil bacterial community of different environments [7], Pseudomonas spp. are key members of the soil microbiome. Considered as copiotrophs, because they are specially present in areas where resource availability is high and carbon sources are simple [8], their remarkable nutritional versatility allows them to exploit diverse rhizosphere environments, where each plant exudates a variety of organic compounds [9]. Their high rhizosphere competence is critical for the correct functioning of microbial inoculants and their effect on soil microbiome [10,11]. The physiological and genetic adaptability of Pseudomonas spp. facilitated the widespread distribution of this genus in various ecosystems around the world [12–14]. Besides, those genomic traits allow these bacteria to be continuously studied as sources of new metabolic pathways and novel products, sometimes related with plant-probiotic activities [15–18], which could be useful for the development of more efficient agricultural bio-inputs. Genome sequencing has become a useful tool for different microbiology projects, not only to understand the genetic basis of metabolic processes [19,20], but also to unravel some inconsistences in taxonomic affiliations that the classical approaches cannot define, for instance, by comparing the average nucleotide identity (ANI) [21,22]. As Pseudomonas spp. genomes are so adaptable, these techniques have recently allowed the description of several novel species [23–26], and to better organize this genus, which is the largest within Gram-negative bacteria [27]. An additional benefit of next generation sequencing is the possibility to access to an increasing amount of genetic information. Thus, genome mining has become an essential tool for processing such amount of data generated, in order to search for new catalysts, targets or products, particularly in microorganisms with industrial applications, as PGPM [28]. There are several reports on the difficulties to reproduce the positive effects of PGPM that had been seen at the laboratory on plant growth, in field assays, most probably due to the influence of several uncontrolled biotic and abiotic factors [29–33]. Therefore, the focus has been recently put into the isolation of PGPM from the same agricultural plots or crop rhizospheres where they would be applied later as inoculants. This strategy may help to overcome difficulties in adapting non-native bacterial species in a new environment [6,34–37]. With this purpose, we isolated and characterized a group of 19 pseudomonads from the humid Pampean region of Argentina, which were selected by their in vitro antagonistic activity against different fungal pathogens [6]. One of the isolates, named SVBP6, displayed a broad spectrum of fungal-growth inhibition activity. Besides, SVBP6 could not be clearly assigned to any of the Pseudomonas species already described at that moment. Therefore, the aim of this work was to obtain and explore the draft genome of strain SVBP6, in order to better define its taxonomic assignment, to survey the genetic determinants of the broad antifungal activity shown in vitro, and to discover putative plant-probiotic traits that may be instrumental for this strain as an agricultural bio-input.