Introduction The ubiquitin 26S proteasome system (UPS) controls the life span of specific regulatory proteins, which are required for coordinated development, signal transduction and DNA maintenance. Target proteins are linked to ubiquitin by the sequential action of E1, E2 and E3 enzymes. A crucial step during this enzymatic cascade is carried out by E3 ubiquitin ligases, which recognize their specific substrate and catalyze the transfer of ubiquitin. SCF-complexes are multi-subunit E3 enzymes consisting of three major subunits (Cul1, Skp1 and Rbx1), which form the core enzyme and an exchangeable set of substrate-specific adaptors called F-box proteins [1,2]. The F-box domain of these adaptors is an N-terminal binding site of approximately 45 amino acids. It binds to the Skp1 linker to connect to Cul1. The human genome encodes 69 F-box proteins and defects in F-box mediated ubiquitination are associated with various diseases like diabetes, Parkinson or cancer [3–5]. Only little is known about the role of F-box proteins in virulence of fungal pathogens, though fungal F-box proteins play important roles for cellular development, transcription, signal transduction and nutrient sensing [6–8]. Aspergillus fumigatus is a soil borne, ubiquitously distributed filamentous fungus, growing on organic matter [3,9]. Besides its saprophytic lifestyle A. fumigatus also acts as an opportunistic human pathogen and causes life-threatening invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA) in immunocompromised hosts. High mortality rates of up to 90% among infected patients are linked to azole resistance, the lack of new antifungals and increasing numbers of immunosuppressive therapies [9–12]. Great efforts have been conducted to identify virulence factors, which discriminate A. fumigatus from its closely related but significantly less pathogenic relative Aspergillus nidulans [13–19]. Virulence of A. fumigatus is presumably the result of a complex multifactorial network, rather than unique and sophisticated virulence factors. A. fumigatus pathogenicity is based on small infectious conidia and its ability to rapidly adapt to constantly changing conditions including high temperature, nutritional changes, hypoxia or high pH [4,20]. This is further supported by the production of secondary metabolites (SM) such as melanins, which protect from UV radiation or the immunosuppressive mycotoxin gliotoxin [21–23]. The rapid responses of A. fumigatus to environmental stressors are linked to distinct evolutionary conserved molecular mechanisms, which are often part of development regulating processes [1,2]. A recently identified important developmental regulator in A. nidulans is Fbx15, which is required for sexual and asexual development. Furthermore, Fbx15 accumulates in SCFFbx15 complexes in csn-deficient mutants of A. nidulans [3–5]. The COP9 signalosome (CSN) multi-subunit complex plays a crucial role in fruiting body formation, oxidative stress tolerance and SM production in A. nidulans [6,7,24,25]. CSN acts as deneddylase by removing the isopeptide bond of the ubiquitin-like protein Nedd8 from a lysine residue of cullin scaffolds of those E3 ligases, which are not interacting with substrate molecules for ubqituitination [3,9]. Repetitive cycles of cullin neddylation/deneddylation are especially important for development because they promote the exchange of F-box adaptors from SCF E3 ligases [9–12]. The genomes of A. nidulans or its pathogenic counterpart A. fumigatus comprise approximately 70 F-box protein encoding genes, of which three (fbx15, fbx23, grrA) have been reported to influence developmental steps in A. nidulans [4,13–18,26]. In this study we characterized the molecular function of the Fbx15 counterpart of the pathogen A. fumigatus. We were originally interested whether F-box proteins, which play a crucial role for fungal development in A. nidulans are connected to A. fumigatus pathogenicity. We found a novel dual function for F-box proteins because Fbx15 is not only part of nuclear SCF complexes but also controls the nuclear localization of the SsnF/Ssn6 component of the highly conserved eukaryotic transcriptional co-repressor complex Ssn6/Tup1. Cellular Fbx15 function is controlled by posttranslational phosphorylation and dephosphorylation during stress. Fbx15 including the F-box domain is required for cellular stress responses, the control of gliotoxin production and for virulence in a mouse model. Fbx15 is fungal-specific and might therefore be an interesting novel target for new drugs to treat invasive aspergillosis.