INTRODUCTION Secondary metabolites play important roles in physiological adaptation and ecologic fitness of the organisms producing secondary metabolites (1, 2). These metabolites vary widely in structure and biological activity, with some having valuable pharmaceutical and agricultural applications (3, 4). Diverse classes of secondary metabolites are produced by plants, animals, and microorganisms, but knowledge of the natural functions of secondary metabolites is still limited. Secondary metabolites are thought to represent important adaptive characters of the organisms producing secondary metabolites in their native environments (2, 5). For example, a secondary metabolite with antimicrobial activity may allow organisms to inhibit competitors that occupy the same niches (6). On the other hand, secondary metabolism poses metabolic burdens to the producer by diverting precursors, cofactors, and energy from primary metabolism (7). Consequently, unnecessary expression of secondary metabolites can be costly to organisms producing secondary metabolites. To balance the benefits and costs, secondary metabolism is controlled by complex regulatory networks that regulate production in response to environmental factors and physiological status of the organism producing secondary metabolites (8, 9). These networks involve both global and pathway-specific regulators operating to coordinate secondary metabolite biosynthesis pathways at transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels (10–12). The production of a large spectrum of secondary metabolites is a characteristic of bacteria in the genus Pseudomonas (13). Secondary metabolism in Pseudomonas spp. requires the GacS-GacA two-component regulatory system, composed of the sensor kinase GacS and the cognate cellular response regulator GacA (14). In the presence of an unknown signal(s), the sensor kinase GacS autophosphorylates and transfers a phosphate group to the response regulator GacA, which governs a complex signal transduction pathway involving regulatory RNAs and translational repression (14). The GacS-GacA system controls the expression of hundreds of genes, including those required for the production of secondary metabolites and extracellular enzymes (15–19). Accordingly, mutation of gacA and/or gacS has pleiotropic effects on the bacterial cell, influencing motility, iron acquisition, biofilm formation, aspects of primary metabolism, and many other phenotypes (15, 16, 20). Given the broad influence of the GacS-GacA system on bacterial physiology, it is striking that spontaneous gacS and gacA mutants (i.e., Gac− mutants) emerge and accumulate in cultures of Pseudomonas spp. (17, 21–27). Colonies of these mutants can be distinguished from those of the wild type visually by their expanded colony size, flattened appearance, increased fluorescence under UV light, and lack of extracellular protease production (21, 24). In this study, we compared several species of Pseudomonas spp. for accumulation of spontaneous Gac− mutants in a nutrient-rich broth medium. One strain, Pseudomonas protegens Pf-5, was selected for further studies. Strain Pf-5 is a soil bacterium known for its capacity to inhibit the growth of phytopathogenic bacteria and fungi, suppress plant diseases, and kill certain insects through production of a large spectrum of secondary metabolites and toxins (10, 28–32). Here, we evaluated the role of secondary metabolism in the relative fitness of Gac− mutants versus wild-type Pf-5 in culture. We found that secondary metabolism contributes to the evolution of P. protegens Pf-5 in culture, assessed as the proportion of spontaneous mutants in this important regulatory system. More importantly, the accumulation of Gac− mutants was significantly affected by both biotic and abiotic environmental factors, including medium composition and interspecific competition, suggesting that spontaneous mutation of gacS or gacA can be an approach by which bacteria adapt to different environmental conditions.