INTRODUCTION The alarming number of antibiotic resistant pathogens and the declining rate of novel antibiotics discovered makes the search for new antibiotic compounds one of the most important tasks of this century. The majority of drugs in the clinic has been and continues to be inspired by bioactive compounds produced as secondary metabolites by living organisms (1–3). These so-called natural products have been isolated from a variety of sources including plants, fungi and bacteria. Soil dwelling bacteria of the phylum Actinobacteria have particularly been shown to be a rich source for a variety of novel compounds with diverse bioactivities (4). It is remarkable that this reservoir of discovery has only been the product of some 1% of cultivable bacteria, many of which harbor still untapped genetic potential (1). Traditionally, drug discovery has been largely based on bioactivity-guided methods. More recently, with the advent of next generation sequencing, genome-based methods invigorate new drug discovery efforts (5). Genome mining revealed that many bacteria previously believed to not produce natural products harbor dormant potential and that even well studied sources contain orphan biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs), with products yet to be discovered (6). Automated genome mining tools such as antiSMASH (7) and PRISM (8), as well as databases such as MIBiG (9) or the antiSMASH database (10), along with methods such as EvoMining (11), allow for effective and fast mining of the thousands of available bacterial genomes. The current largest collection of automatically mined gene clusters is the “Atlas of Biosynthetic gene Clusters”, a component of the “Integrated Microbial Genomes" Platform of the Joint Genome Institute (JGI IMG-ABC) (12). As of January 2017 this database contains more than a million gene clusters, the majority of them orphan. The biggest challenge now is to prioritize the more laborious wet lab experiments for BGCs with the most promising bioactivities. One recently developed approach for the specific discovery of new antibacterial compounds uses resistance as a trait for selecting for antibiotic producing bacteria. Any bacterium producing an antibiotic needs to evolve a self-protection mechanism to avoid suicide (13). Based on this idea, Wright et al. designed a screen to exploit the self-protection mechanism of antibiotic producers to enrich microbial libraries for producers of selected antibiotic scaffolds (14). Resistance mechanisms vary and include the inactivation and export of antibiotics, as well as protection and modification of target proteins. In the latter case a second resistant copy of the antibiotic target gene is typically detectable in the genome, often found within the BGC of the antibiotic and often horizontally acquired with the BGC (15–17). Moore and colleagues used this concept and screened for duplicated housekeeping genes co-localized with orphan BGCs. Using this target-directed genome mining, they were able to prioritize an orphan polyketide synthase-nonribosomal peptide synthetase hybrid BGC, responsible for producing a fatty-acid synthase inhibitor, containing a fatty acid synthase resistance gene (18). This study demonstrated nicely that the search for BGCs in conjunction with duplicated housekeeping genes can not only help prioritize BGCs with antibiotic activities, but also provide insights into the mode of action of encoded natural products. So far, this search has been done manually, checking each detected gene cluster for possible resistant housekeeping genes. Here we introduce the antibiotic resistant target seeker (ARTS), a user-friendly web tool that automatically detects known resistance, as well as possible resistant housekeeping genes in actinobacterial genomes based on three criteria: duplication, localization within a biosynthetic gene cluster and evidence of horizontal gene transfer (HGT). ARTS allows the user a fast and efficient genome-based prioritization of bacterial strains with the potential to produce antibiotics with interesting and possibly novel modes of action.