INTRODUCTION Colibactins are genotoxic natural products of unknown structure produced by human commensal and extraintestinal pathogenic strains of Enterobacteriaceae and by other bacteria associated with different host organisms. Biosynthesis of colibactins is allowed by a highly conserved 54-kb genomic “pks” island found in Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter aerogenes, and Citrobacter koseri (1, 2). The colibactin synthesis pathway is also found in marine Pseudovibrio spp. associated with sponges, in the honey bee gut symbiont Frischella perrara, and in Erwinia oleae isolated from olive tree knots (3–5). Colibactin production has been linked to pathogenicity and cancer. Indeed, the pks island is associated with a highly virulent subset of extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli isolates and with hypervirulent K. pneumoniae strains (6–8). The contribution of colibactins to the virulence of E. coli and K. pneumoniae has been demonstrated in rodent sepsis and meningitis models, where isogenic mutants impaired for colibactin production exhibit attenuated virulence compared to wild-type pks-positive (pks+) strains (9–11). The presence of the pks island also correlates with the ability of E. coli strains belonging to phylogenetic group B2 to establish persistent colonization of the host intestine (12). Studies have found an increased presence of pks+
E. coli in colorectal cancer patients (13–15). Furthermore, colonization with colibactin-producing pks+
E. coli promotes colon tumor formation in mouse models of chronic intestinal inflammation, supporting the idea of a role for these bacteria in the development of colorectal cancer (13, 16, 17). The pks island hosts 19 genes (clbA to clbS), and mutation of any of these genes, except clbS, results in a decrease in or loss of the genotoxic activity (1). The pks island codes for multienzymatic biosynthesis machinery, with nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) and polyketide synthases (PKSs), an efflux pump, and “accessory” enzymes. The NRPSs and PKSs are modified posttranslationally for acceptance of synthesis building blocks by the ClbA phosphopantetheinyl transferase (18, 19). The NRPSs and PKSs then function as a multimodular assembly line that synthesizes the inactive precolibactins. Precolibactin biosynthetic intermediates are offloaded from the assembly line by the ClbQ thioesterase, thus possibly regulating colibactin synthesis and genotoxic activity (20, 21). Precolibactins then follow a prodrug pathway, where the products are transported to the bacterial periplasm by the ClbM pump (22). Precolibactins are cleaved by the periplasmic peptidase ClbP to remove an N-terminal precursor scaffold (myristoyl-asparagine) and generate active colibactins (23–25). This prodrug export and activation pathway likely represents a self-protection mechanism preventing self-toxicity to the producing bacteria. As a supplemental self-protection mechanism, the pks island encodes the ClbS resistance protein, a cyclopropane hydrolase that inactivates colibactins in the producing bacterium (26, 27). This protection is also observed in cultured human cells transfected with the clbS gene (26). Potent colibactin genotoxicity has been observed in mammalian cells transiently infected with pks+ enterobacteria: a 4-h contact between live pks+
E. coli and cultured epithelial cells results in host DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) that can be detected 4 h later (1). As a result, the cell recruits the DNA-damage response and activates the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated kinase (ATM) pathway, resulting in cell cycle arrest to allow DNA repair or in removal of the injured cells by apoptosis and senescence (1, 16, 28, 29). In vivo, signs of DNA damage can be detected in gut cells of animals colonized with pks+
E. coli (10, 28, 30) or in liver or brain cells of mice infected with pks+
K. pneumoniae (11, 31). The DNA damage inflicted by colibactins is deleterious for the host cell genome stability, as low numbers of infecting pks+
E. coli bacteria promote chromosomal instability, aneuploidy, and gene mutations, resulting in cellular transformation (28). As natural mature colibactins confound isolation, how they inflict DNA damage, directly or indirectly, leading to the formation of DNA DSBs and ultimately promoting tumorigenesis, remains poorly understood. In this study, we identified DNA interstrand cross-links (ICLs) as the primary mechanism by which the naturally bacterially produced colibactins induce DNA damage in purified DNA in vitro and in infected cultured human cells in cellulo.