Introduction The 7-azapteridine antibiotics, toxoflavin (1,6-dimethylpyrimido[5,4-e]-1,2,4-triazine-5,7(1H,6H)-dione) and its analogs such as methyltoxoflavin, fervenulin and reumycin, belong to the prosthetic group of a bacterial yellow pigment that is highly toxic to plants, fungi, animals, humans and microorganisms. Toxoflavin was first isolated from Pseudomonas cocovenenans, with bongkrekic acid as two toxins that caused food poisoning [1, 2]. Toxoflavin is naturally synthesized by several bacteria such as Burkholderia glumae, Burkholderia plantarii, and Burkholderia gladioli. Toxoflavin was known to be one of the critical virulence factors in crop diseases such as bacterial panicle blight, also known as seedling rot or grain rot, which is caused by B. glumae and B. gladioli [3, 4]. Toxicity of bacterial toxoflavin as a major virulence factor has been assigned to its ability to function as an active electron carrier between NADH and oxygen. The action of toxoflavin bypasses the cellular cytochrome system and causes the generation of hydrogen peroxide in the presence of oxygen and light [5, 6]. This may also explain why toxoflavin shows antibacterial, antifungal and herbicidal activities [7]. Infection of toxoflavin-producing bacteria, particularly seed-borne B. glumae, has led to severe losses in rice crops in the world [6, 8, 9]. Bacterial grain rot occurring at the flowering stage of rice under high degree of temperature and moisture caused a significant loss in the rice yield up to 34%. In the southern USA, outbreaks of bacterial grain rot in rice fields in Louisiana in 1995 and 1998 made the rice yield loss up to 40% [4]. Currently, there are few control methods available for bacterial panicle blight of rice. Oxolinic acid treatment to rice seed was highly effective for the control of rice disease, but B. glumae strains naturally resistant to oxolinic acid have already occurred [10]. Although some varieties of rice exhibit partial resistance to bacterial panicle blight, no rice variety showing complete resistance to the disease is currently available [9, 11]. There has been growing interest both in interference with biosynthesis and in degradation of toxoflavin. An effective enzyme to degrade the toxin itself can be used to serve as an anti-virulence strategy in toxoflavin-mediated diseases of rice. Recently, Paenibacillus polymyxa strain JH2 that survived in the presence of toxoflavin was isolated from rice seed samples [12]. From this strain, a toxoflavin-degrading enzyme (TflA) capable of degrading toxoflavin was identified. The TflA enzyme catalyzed the aromatic ring-opening reaction by incorporating two atoms of dioxygen in toxoflavin and required Mn2+ ion and dithiothreitol, unlike other extradiol dioxygenases [13–15]. Nowadays the metagenomic DNA library consisting of genomes from as-yet uncultured or uncultivable microorganisms plays an important role in the identification of new enzymes with unique properties [16, 17]. In this study, we first attempted to discover a new toxoflavin-degrading enzyme from metagenome. A high-throughput screening process to detect the toxoflavin degradation activity from metagenome was successfully carried out. After expression of the metagenomic gene and purification of enzyme, toxoflavin degradation reaction by the metagenome-derived toxoflavin-degrading enzyme was further characterized.