1. Introduction Marine-derived natural products represent a rich source of potential drug candidates. Over the past 50 years, more than 30,000 natural products have been discovered from the ocean and unique marine microbes have become a treasure trove of novel lead compounds [1,2]. At the same time, tuberculosis (TB), a chronic and lethal disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis has been a major threat worldwide and continues to impose heavy tolls upon humanity. Recently, increases in TB co-infection rates with HIV and the proliferation of multi-drug resistant bacteria have severely limited the effectiveness of conventional antibiotics, making it urgent to identify new anti-TB drug candidates [3]. In our efforts to find anti-TB drugs from marine-derived Streptomyces, the microbe Streptomyces atratus SCSIO ZH16 was found to generate a number of natural products with good activity against M. tuberculosis. For example, ilamycin and its derivatives produced by the S. atratus SCSIO ZH16 have notably specific anti-TB activities [4]. Interestingly, the novel compound atratumycin, identified originally from genome mining of S. atratus SCSIO ZH16NS-80S, a genetically engineered variant of S. atratus SCSIO ZH16, also has been found to possess significant anti-TB activities [5]. Our previous study showed that atratumycin is a cyclodecapeptide containing a unique cinnamic acid unit. The 2-dimensional structure and stereochemistry of atratumycin were determined using extensive spectroscopic data including those generated by X-ray crystallography and Marfey’s method analyses. Atratumycin was found to have minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) values of 3.8 and 14.6 μM in assays against M. tuberculosis H37Ra and H37Rv, respectively [5]. Moreover, the biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) of atratumycin (atr) was identified and the cluster boundaries were determined. Additionally, the only cytochrome p450 in the atr cluster has been characterized using both in vivo and in vitro methods in our laboratories. Careful analysis of the atr cluster revealed 33 genes in all; three appear to play assorted regulatory roles whereas two appear to be responsible for atratumycin transport [5]. Notably, the details of these regulatory and transporter genes have been, thus far, elusive. We report here the functional characterization of the atr regulatory and transporter genes by way of in silico analyses as well as gene inactivations, trans-complementations and over-expression experiments. Two LuxR family regulators and two ABC transporter proteins have been identified and characterized herein. Over-expression of four LuxR or transporter genes significantly increased atratumycin production by 1.7–2.0 fold relative to wild-type (WT) strain, suggesting that they play positive roles in atratumycin production. Interestingly, the disruption of atr32, a peculiar Streptomyces antibiotic regulatory protein (SARP) gene, increased the yield of atratumycin by 2.3-fold, which was distinct from previous studies. In addition, a large vector containing the complete atr cluster was constructed and successfully expressed in the heterologous host Streptomyces coelicolor M1154. These achievements represent important steps in realizing improved atratumycin availability and access to related congeners via combinatorial biosynthetic strategies.