1. Introduction Trichothecenes are a group of mycotoxins produced by several filamentous fungi including Fusarium. They have a trichothecene skeleton of 12,13-epoxytrichothec-9-ene in common, but their side chain modification greatly varies, resulting in a large difference in their toxicity [1,2]. They exert toxicity mainly through the inhibition of protein synthesis in eukaryotes [3]. Some fusaria are notorious fungi, known to cause Fusarium head blight in important crops. Based on the biosynthetic pathways, trichothecenes are largely divided into two groups: t-type trichothecenes, with a modifying group at C-3 position, and d-type trichothecenes, without a modifying group [4,5]. In the early biosynthetic pathway of trichothecenes, trichodiene is first synthesized through the cyclization of farnesyl pyrophosphate by Tri5p [6]. Trichodiene is then oxygenated to isotrichotriol, followed by spontaneous cyclization to produce the following t-type trichothecenes: Fusarium graminearum produces deoxynivalenol (DON), nivalenol, and their acetylated forms; Fusarium sporotrichioides produces T-2 toxin, neosalaniol, and diacetoxyscirpenol. On the other hand, in non-fusaria, including Myrothecium, Trichoderma, Trichothecium, Stachybotrys, and Spicellum [7], trichodiene is oxygenated to isotrichodiol followed by spontaneous cyclization to produce d-type trichothecenes. There is another classification method of dividing trichothecenes into four types (A–D) based on their chemical structures [8]. Type B group is distinguished from type A group by the presence of a ketone at C-8, and either type is synthesized by both t-type and d-type trichothecene producers. Type C group, which contains a 7,8-epoxide, and type D group, which contains a macrocyclic ring between C-4 and C-15, are exclusively produced by d-type trichothecene producers. In fusaria, the first trichothecene produced is isotrichodermol (ITDol), which is immediately acetylated at the C-3 position by 3-O-acetyltransferase, Tri101p, into isotrichodermin (ITD) [5,9]. It has been reported that a 3-acetylated trichothecene is generally less toxic than its corresponding 3-hydroxy form [10,11,12,13]. Hence, it was suggested that Tri101p confers self-resistance to trichothecene produced in fusaria; indeed, Schizosaccharomyces pombe transformed with the Tri101 gene has been found to be more resistant to T-2 toxin than the wild type (WT) [5]. So far, Tri101 has been isolated from fusaria, including F. graminearum and F. sporotrichioides, and their enzyme kinetics have been evaluated extensively [14]. Trichothecenes are phytotoxins and may play a role as a virulence factor that contributes toxin producers to infect host plants [15,16,17]. Therefore, in order to combat Fusarium head blight, researchers have made extensive efforts to examine the effect of the transgenic expression of Tri101 on trichothecene resistance and Fusarium infection in host cereals [18]. These studies have unequivocally proved that transgenic tobacco and rice showed improved trichothecene resistance [19,20]. In wheat, moderate tolerance to Fusarium infection was observed in a field trial [21]. On the contrary, in barley, deoxynivalenol may not be a virulence factor, and no effect on infection was observed in a field trial [22]. Thus, the gene manipulation of Tri101 has been effective to confer tolerance to trichothecenes in some host plants, although the effect might be limited. In contrast to the case with microbes and plants, the effects of trichothecene acetylation at the C-3 position and the transfection of Tri101 into cultured mammalian cells are complicated to understand. Although there is approximately a 100-fold difference in terms of the in vitro inhibition of protein synthesis in rabbit reticulocytes between 3-acetylated trichothecenes and their corresponding 3-hydroxy forms, this difference was reduced to tenfold in terms of the in vivo inhibition of glycoprotein synthesis in BGK-21 cells [5]. Although it has been reported that a 3-acetyl trichothecene has lower toxicity than its corresponding 3-hydroxy form [2], there is a conflicting report of 3-acetyl T-2 toxin being as toxic as T-2 toxin in human cell cultures [23], and, so far, no reports have shown that improved resistance to trichothecenes is conferred by Tri101 transfection in cultured mammalian cells. Moreover, it has been reported that the acetyl group at the C-3 position of trichothecene is easily removed in animal systems [24]. In this way, the toxicity of a C-3 acetyl trichothecene has tended to be inaccurately estimated by measuring the toxicity of a mixture of C-3 acetyl and C-3 hydroxy trichothecenes. Therefore, in this study, we attempted to maintain the 3-O-acetyl group attached to the trichothecene skeleton by the transgenic expression of Tri101 in murine FM3A cells, resulting in a more accurate evaluation of the toxicity of 3-acetyl trichothecenes. We also examined whether Tri101 transfection into mammalian cultured cells improves their resistance to 3-hydorxytrichothecenes.