1. Introduction Cereulide is a toxin secreted by spore-forming Gram-positive bacteria belonging to the Bacillus cereus group. As a cyclic dodecadepsipeptide consisting of three repetitions of [D-O-Leu-D-Ala-L-O-Val-L-Val], it is structurally related to the macrolide antibiotic valinomycin with [L-Val-L-O-Val-D-Val-L-Lac]3 [1]. Like valinomycin, cereulide is synthesized enzymatically via non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS), which are encoded by a 24 kb gene cluster tagged as Ces. Although cesH is a monocistron with its own promoter, other genetic elements (cesTPABCD) form an integral operon initiated by the cesP1 promoter [2]. From the toxicology aspect, the same toxic effects on mammalian cells have been exhibited by cereulide and valinomycin, since both are potassium selective ionophores, although cereulide owns a much greater binding ability [3,4]. After being treated, potassium ions in the cell efflux following the concentration gradation and a lower level of potassium is achieved. This would directly trigger dysfunctions of solute transport, and cytoplasmic pH balance as well as other important physiological processes that depend on intracellular potassium homeostasis [5]. Meanwhile, changes in the ionic permeability enable the potassium diffusion across the inner mitochondrial membrane. Cation influx would inevitably neutralize the transmembrane electrical potential, which is established by the unequal distribution of protons, then the uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation chains and cell apoptosis would be gradually initiated [6,7]. Additionally, the lipophilic of this toxin makes it easy for skins to be penetrated. As primary victims, the mucosal cells of the respiratory and intestinal tracts would be irritated [8]. Although risks of valinomycin have not been widely presented thus far, cereulide is notorious for its remarkable chemical stability, appears to be resistant to casual sterile procedures; neither autoclaving at 121 °C for 20 min nor proteolytic enzyme treatments have sufficiently inactivated accumulated ones [9]. As described in many cases, one of the syndromes caused by cereulide is characterized by vomiting. During the first six hours post ingestion, emesia accompanied by abdominal pain in patients could be observed, normally, this self-limiting illness would not last more than 24 h [10,11]. Nevertheless, since symptoms generated by acute cereulide poisoning are nearly identical to those caused by enterotoxins produced by Staphylococcus aureus, outbreaks caused by cereulide-producing B. cereus are likely to be misdiagnosed and underestimated [12]. In the last few years, lethal incidences of young adults have been attributed to cereulide, which is occasionally fatal for immune-deficient individuals or toddlers [13,14]. Cereulide-producing strains are usually recognized as food-poisoning pathogens, although relative isolates are rare in the environment [15,16]. Benefiting from the phenotypic variability and adhesive nature acquired once converted into endospores, emetic B. cereus contaminations on equipment and raw materials related to the food industry can be encountered frequently [17]. To suppress the growth of B. cereus during storage, many general approaches have been recommended, including the use of varieties of additives and alternatives to antibiotics [18,19], while research on developing specific control methods have been launched by confirming the preservation conditions favoring cereulide production. Thus far, the impacts of atmospheric oxygen and temperature have been fully elucidated [20,21], and the matrix of food has been proven to be another key factor affecting cereulide production, as well as the multiplication of B. cereus [22]. According to epidemic statistics for the past decades, among all of the food poisoning associated with cereulide ingestion, bread, rice, noodles and spaghetti have frequently been involved. It was suspected that these types of food contained some common ingredients (e.g., starch) that supported cereulide formation. Indeed, maximal cereulide production as well as culture preference has been observed in farinaceous food [23]. Surprisingly, most tested emetic B. cereus isolates were not able to digest starch due to the absence of related enzymatic elements [24]. It was therefore hypothesized that the promotion was due to glucose, the essential hydrolysate and energy source for bacterial carbohydrate metabolism, which needs to be clarified. In this study, the effects of glucose supplement on cereulide production and on the transcription levels of the genetic determinants, including cesA and cesH related with non-ribosomal polypeptide synthesis, and ilvB (a major branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) biosynthetic gene) related with the substrate accumulation [25], were analyzed. Furthermore, the cesH knockout mutant and the complemented strain were constructed and the effect of deletion on cereulide formation was surveyed. Our results demonstrated that cesH displayed a negative effect on cereulide production. Followed by predicting an alpha/beta hydrolase fold in the protein encoded by cesH, CesH was characterized as an esterase which might anchor in the cell membrane of B. cereus AH187. However, no activity against cereulide or its analogue valinomycin was demonstrated in vitro. Considering the inevitable defect of detergent usage for the enormously hydrophobic substrate, CesH was subsequently expressed in Bacillus subtilis 168, both the valinomycin resistance acquisition by the host and signs of toxin degradation indicated it functioned normally in vivo. Moreover, through site directed mutation, the catalytic core of CesH was identified as a combination of Serine 86, Glutamate 199, and Histidine 227.