INTRODUCTION The emergence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria is a growing problem that represents one of the top three threats to global public health worldwide (1–4). Moreover, it has been estimated that approximately 70% of infection-causing bacteria are already resistant to at least one antibiotic available in routine clinical practice. Therefore, all the efforts to provide a detailed molecular picture of a specific resistance mechanism can contribute positively to improve our understanding of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and its dynamics. Dityromycin is a cyclic decapeptide antibiotic (Fig. 1A) discovered as a secondary metabolite produced by Streptomyces sp. strain AM-2504 (5, 6). Its structure is almost identical to that of GE82832, a translocation inhibitor produced by Streptosporangium spp. (7–9). Both molecules interact with the same ribosomal site and display the same mechanism of action, even if they are produced by different microorganisms. The interaction of dityromycin with the ribosome is peculiar compared to other ribosomal inhibitors, since it interacts exclusively with the ribosomal protein S12 without a direct interaction with the 16S rRNA (Fig. 1B and C) (8, 9). Indeed, the binding of dityromycin to the ribosome is mediated by its interaction with five amino acids at the ribosomal protein S12, namely, arginine 30, valine 32, arginine 55, histidine 76, and valine 78 (Fig. 1C). Dityromycin inhibits protein synthesis by blocking the translocation of tRNA through the ribosome, while it has almost no effect on the accommodation of aminoacyl-tRNA into the P-site or the A-site, in the context of either the 30S ribosomal subunit or the 70S ribosome (7). Recent studies have shown that dityromycin blocks the EF-G-dependent translocation of peptidyl tRNA and mRNA without preventing the ribosomal binding of the elongation factor. In particular, dityromycin hampers the interaction between domain III of EF-G and protein S12, which is located near the decoding center of the ribosome, at the interface of two subunits (9, 10). FIG 1Interaction of dityromycin with the 30S ribosomal subunit. (A) Chemical structure of the antibiotic dityromycin. (B) Three-dimensional (3D) structure of the 30S ribosomal subunit (gray) and localization of dityromycin (red) in contact with the ribosomal protein S12 (green). A, P, and E tRNA binding sites are indicated in blue, yellow, and violet, respectively. (C) Close-up of dityromycin (red) bound to S12 (green) missing the C-terminal domain. The amino acid residues of S12 involved in the interaction with the antibiotic are also indicated. (Modified from reference 9.) Interaction of dityromycin with the 30S ribosomal subunit. (A) Chemical structure of the antibiotic dityromycin. (B) Three-dimensional (3D) structure of the 30S ribosomal subunit (gray) and localization of dityromycin (red) in contact with the ribosomal protein S12 (green). A, P, and E tRNA binding sites are indicated in blue, yellow, and violet, respectively. (C) Close-up of dityromycin (red) bound to S12 (green) missing the C-terminal domain. The amino acid residues of S12 involved in the interaction with the antibiotic are also indicated. (Modified from reference 9.) A strict requirement to ensure that the antibiotic producer cell protects itself when the active metabolites are produced, accumulated, and released is to possess a self-resistance mechanism(s) (11). Microorganisms can adopt several strategies to develop self-resistance, such as (i) chemical modification of the target, as in the case of rRNA methylation or mutation (12, 13); (ii) activation of efflux pumps (14, 15); (iii) sequestration of the natural product by proteins keeping the active compound in a bound and inactive state (16, 17); (iv) production of the antibiotic in a prodrug form, activated through selective cleavage by peptidases found in the periplasmic space, and subsequently released outside the cell (18, 19); and (v) oxidative inactivation of the matured prodrug following export (20). Biochemical and genetic similarities demonstrate that such resistance mechanisms have prefigured those found subsequently in antibiotic-resistant pathogens, which have acquired specific genes or gene clusters originally developed by antibiotic producers (21). In this work, we have investigated the self-resistance mechanism developed by Streptomyces sp. strain AM-2504 toward the antibiotic activity of its natural product dityromycin. To prevent self-toxicity, this microorganism has evolved a strategy based on the production of a modified and self-resistant ribosomal protein variant. Our approach consisted in analyzing three aspects, namely, identification and biochemical characterization of the self-resistance mechanism, characterization of the amino acid residues of the ribosomal protein S12 involved in resistance by the heterologous expression of site-directed mutants in Escherichia coli, and a phylogenetic analysis of the dityromycin binding pocket in the ribosomal protein S12.