INTRODUCTION Fungal secondary metabolites are a rich source of bioactive compounds, including important pharmaceuticals such as penicillin, cyclosporine, and statins (1). When the first fungal genomes were sequenced, it became clear that the genomes harbor a higher number of predicted secondary metabolite gene clusters than the number of characterized secondary metabolites, thus revealing a much larger potential (1–4). The number of sequenced fungal genomes is ever increasing, mainly due to large sequencing efforts such as the 1000 Fungal Genomes Project (http://1000.fungalgenomes.org/home/) and the 300 Aspergillus genome project (5, 6), and, with them, the number of new biosynthetic gene clusters (clusters). Despite progress in molecular tools and methods for characterization of such clusters, it is still a time-consuming task, making it unfeasible to investigate all predicted clusters. Therefore, only a small fraction of the clusters is characterized and investigated experimentally. With the plethora of clusters and the aim of discovering novel bioactive compounds useful as drugs, the following question emerges: How do we directly select the most interesting clusters producing potential fungicides, anticancer drugs, and antimicrobial compounds? To meet this need, we have created the “fungal resistance gene-directed genome mining” (FRIGG) pipeline to identify clusters producing likely bioactive compounds. Appropriately for a predictive algorithm, Frigg is the Norse goddess of foresight and wisdom. Many bioactive compounds are toxic compounds that also impair the organisms that synthesize them by inhibiting essential functions; therefore, a self-resistance mechanism is needed in order for the organism to survive (7–9). One known self-resistance mechanism is the duplication of the target gene, where the duplicate is resistant to the compound. This second resistant version is most often located as part of the biosynthetic gene cluster producing the toxic compound. This mechanism has been seen in several bacterial instances, such as novobiocin (10) and pentalenolactone (11, 12), and more recently in fungi. Mycophenolic acid (MPA) is produced by Penicillium brevicompactum, where it inhibits IMP dehydrogenase (IMPDH), the rate-limiting step in guanine synthesis. The biosynthetic cluster of MPA revealed an additional copy of IMPDH (Fig. 1A), which is insensitive to MPA, thus conferring resistance (13–15). Another example is fellutamide B, a proteasome inhibitor produced by Aspergillus nidulans. Within the biosynthetic gene cluster, a gene (inpE) encodes a proteasome subunit (Fig. 1B), and it was shown that this gene confers resistance (16). FIG 1Resistance mechanism. (A) Mycophenolic acid chemical structure and biosynthetic cluster with the known resistance gene mpaF (highlighted in red), which is an IMP dehydrogenase (IMPDH) inhibitor. (B) Chemical structure of fellutamide B and overview of the biosynthetic cluster, including the resistance gene inpE (highlighted in red), which is a proteasome inhibitor. (C) Illustration of the resistance mechanism used by some toxin producers. The secondary metabolite is a toxin which inhibits an essential enzyme, the target of the compound. Within the cluster responsible for producing the toxin, a copy of the target gene is found; this version is still functioning despite the compound’s presence and hence makes the organism self-resistant. Resistance mechanism. (A) Mycophenolic acid chemical structure and biosynthetic cluster with the known resistance gene mpaF (highlighted in red), which is an IMP dehydrogenase (IMPDH) inhibitor. (B) Chemical structure of fellutamide B and overview of the biosynthetic cluster, including the resistance gene inpE (highlighted in red), which is a proteasome inhibitor. (C) Illustration of the resistance mechanism used by some toxin producers. The secondary metabolite is a toxin which inhibits an essential enzyme, the target of the compound. Within the cluster responsible for producing the toxin, a copy of the target gene is found; this version is still functioning despite the compound’s presence and hence makes the organism self-resistant. An illustration of the general mechanism can be seen in Fig. 1C: two versions of an enzyme are present. One version (the target) is affected by the secondary metabolite, whereas the other version (the resistance gene) is not inhibited by the secondary metabolite. Even though only a few examples of this mechanism have been verified in filamentous fungi so far (13, 16–18), it is possible that this resistance mechanism is more widely distributed. We thus developed the FRIGG pipeline for identifying putative bioactive clusters with resistance genes. The aim of the pipeline is to identify bioactive clusters in a targeted manner, thus providing a way of selecting the most interesting predicted clusters producing potential valuable drugs from whole-genome sequences. We also note that a similar approach has been successful in bacterial genomes (30). The immediate advantage of the FRIGG pipeline is the direct identification of clusters with a high likelihood of coding for useful bioactive compounds. Another major advantage is that the target of the compound, and, hence, the mode of action, is inherently known. Knowing the target saves a lot of time since linking the compound to the target is extremely difficult and time-consuming. Furthermore, several regular drug discovery steps can be eliminated, since possible uses of the compound are known from the beginning, allowing a direct route to testing for likely modes of action.