Introduction The production of bio-ethanol from the degradation of lignocellulosic biomass has been proposed as a sustainable solution to the energy crisis [1, 2]. Lignocellulose is made of three carbohydrate polymers; lignin, hemicellulose and cellulose, with lignin being the most abundant [3]. Lignin polymers are covalently linked to the other structural polysaccharides, hindering the ability of carbohydrate acting enzymes (CAZymes) to hydrolyze cellulose and hemicellulose [4]. Current industrial extraction methods include subjecting lignocellulose to high temperatures, high pressures, and strong acids and bases to remove lignin and enable processing of hemicellulose and cellulose polysaccharides [4, 5]. Environmental microbiologists have investigated the microbial communities in landfill leachate [6], forest decomposition layers [7, 8], and in the microbiomes of termites [9] and ruminants [10, 11, 12] to co-opt efficient microbial enzymes for lignocellulose degradation. The North American Porcupine, Erethizon dorsatum, is a hind-gut fermenter with an enlarged cecum packed with microbes that aid digestion of lignified plants, coniferous and deciduous cambium (inner bark), and flowers [13]. For this reason, we characterized the microbiome of the porcupine as an attractive source of enzymes for biomass conversion. Using metagenomic and 16S sequencing approaches with the KEGG database, the undergraduate 2016 Dalhousie international Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM) team determined that the porcupine microbiome is replete with genes that could encode proteins similar to known lignocellulose-degrading enzymes [14]. This report provided strong genetic evidence for these enzymes but did not provide direct experimental evidence for enzyme activity. To address this knowledge gap, we, the 2017 Dalhousie iGEM team, created a synthetic metagenomic pipeline which allowed us to identify four candidate CAZyme genes involved in cellulose and hemicellulose degradation; β-glucosidase, α-L-arabinofuranosidase, β-xylosidase and endo-1,4-β-xylanase. These putative enzymes were analyzed alongside their 22 closest homologs using phylogenetics to ensure that the catalytic domain was conserved. These genes were synthesized, cloned into expression vectors and affinity-purified; activity of purified enzymes was measured using matched substrates. Among these, we demonstrated that the microbial endo-1,4-β-xylanase could hydrolyse xylobioside linked to a fluorescent molecule at pH 7. To our knowledge, this study is the first to provide functional characterization of a CAZyme from the porcupine microbiome.