INTRODUCTION Saxitoxin (STX), a bis-guanidinium small molecule produced by brackish and freshwater cyanobacteria and oceanic dinoflagelates associated with red tides, is one of the most lethal neurotoxins, causes paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP), and is the only marine toxin that is declared a chemical weapon (1, 2). Its toxicity is thought to arise primarily from inhibition of select voltage-gated sodium channel (NaV) isoforms (3), although STX may affect other channels (4, 5) and enzymes (6). PSP caused by STX represents a notable public health and commercial hazard that is an increasing problem due to climate change (7). Consequently, shellfish for human consumption are monitored globally for PSP toxins. Current STX detection methods use a cumbersome mouse viability assay (8). Thus, there is great interest in developing better analytical techniques for measuring STX and related cogeners in food sources (7–9). Nature uses diverse strategies to counter toxin exposure that include target protein resistance mutations, toxin sequestration, and toxin removal (10, 11). Although the best understood toxin resistance strategies involve target protein mutations (10, 12, 13), frogs display unusual resistance to STX poisoning (14, 15) that is not believed to involve altered responses of frog NaVs to STX (16). Saxiphilin (Sxph), a 91-kDa transferrin homolog, is an STX-binding protein from American bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana) heart and plasma (16–20). This soluble, dual-function protein has a single high-affinity STX-binding site [Kd (dissociation constant), ~0.2 nM] that recognizes certain STX derivatives (16, 21, 22) and has two ~60 residue thyroglobulin type I (Thy1) repeats (18) that act as potent [Ki (inhibition constant), ~1 nM] cysteine protease inhibitors (23). Other soluble STX-binding proteins have been identified in pufferfish (24, 25), cockles (26), and crabs (27), and STX-binding activity has been reported in the plasma, hemolymph, and tissues from arthropods (19), amphibians (28), fish (19), and reptiles (19). Hence, it is thought that Sxph and analogous toxin-binding proteins constitute a second, less well-characterized toxin resistance mechanism involving toxin sequestration (10, 16, 19). Here, we present high-resolution x-ray crystal structures of apo-Sxph and STX-bound Sxph. These structures reveal key Sxph architectural features, how Sxph recognizes STX, and how the Thy1 domains may engage proteases. Remarkably, the two best-characterized high-affinity STX targets, Sxph and NaVs (29), share a core molecular recognition motif that defines a fingerprint for STX molecular recognition. This information should serve as a touchstone for understanding how STX interacts with channels and other targets (6) and provide guidance for the design of new molecular sensors for STX and related toxins.