Introduction The β-lactam class of antibiotics have broad-spectrum activity and include some of the most commonly prescribed agents used for treating bacterial infections [1–3]. They have a long history of use in medicine, but as with other antibiotics, the emergence of resistance is a major problem [3–5]. There are several mechanisms responsible for β-lactam resistance, which include the production of secreted β-lactamases, enzymes that hydrolyze and inactivate certain members of this antibiotic class [6, 7]. Combinations of β-lactamase inhibitors such as clavulanic acid along with β-lactam antibiotics are often used as a strategy for treating some infections caused by β-lactamase-producing antibiotic resistant bacteria [8, 9]. Clavulanic acid belongs to the clavam family of specialized metabolites and it irreversibly inhibits class A β-lactamases, thereby restoring the activity of β-lactam antibiotics against target organisms in such combinations [10, 11]. The activity of clavulanic acid is attributed in part to its 3R,5R stereochemistry, as other naturally occurring clavams have a 5S configuration (collectively referred to as the 5S clavams) and do not inhibit β-lactamases [8, 12]. Commercial production of clavulanic acid is achieved by fermenting Streptomyces clavuligerus, and a cluster of ∼18 genes referred to as the clavulanic acid biosynthetic gene cluster (CA-BGC) encodes components of the core biosynthetic pathway [13]. It has previously been reported that Streptomyces jumonjinensis and Streptomyces katsurahamanus also produce clavulanic acid, but the sequences of their respective CA-BGCs are not available [12, 14]. On the other hand, the genome sequences of organisms such as Streptomyces flavogriseus (ATCC 33331, also known as S. pratensis) and Saccharomonospora viridis (DSM 43017) contain gene clusters closely resembling the S. clavuligerus CA-BGC, but neither has been shown to produce the metabolite to date [13, 15]. In addition, S. clavuligerus is somewhat unique among clavulanic acid producers as it also produces certain 5S clavams as products of a pathway related to clavulanic acid [13, 16]. Clavulanic acid and the 5S clavams have common biosynthetic origins and the pathway involved in their production can be roughly divided into two parts in S. clavuligerus (Fig 1). The “early” steps leading up to the intermediate clavaminic acid are shared during the production of both types of metabolites, with all intermediates possessing 5S configuration [17]. Beyond clavaminic acid (also a 5S clavam) the pathway diverges into specific “late” steps leading to either the 5S clavams or to clavulanic acid (Fig 1) [18]. 10.1371/journal.pone.0215960.g001Fig 1Diagrammatic representation of the partial clavulanic acid biosynthetic pathway from Streptomyces clavuligerus.Genes encoding enzymes known to be involved in the “early” shared stages of 5S clavam and clavulanic acid production, and those predicted to encode proteins involved exclusively in the biosynthesis of clavulanic acid (“late” steps) are indicated. In addition, genes encoding enzymes with known biosynthetic functions are shown next to arrows representing the respective reactions catalyzed by them, and the question mark indicates the unknown protein(s) responsible for the 5S to 5R epimerization and side chain modification of clavam intermediates during clavulanic acid biosynthesis. The two 5S clavam intermediates related to clavaminic acid (R1 = N-glycyl and R2 = N-acetyl-glycyl, respectively), which accumulate in the orf15 and orf16 gene mutants are shown in the dashed box. Diagrammatic representation of the partial clavulanic acid biosynthetic pathway from Streptomyces clavuligerus. Genes encoding enzymes known to be involved in the “early” shared stages of 5S clavam and clavulanic acid production, and those predicted to encode proteins involved exclusively in the biosynthesis of clavulanic acid (“late” steps) are indicated. In addition, genes encoding enzymes with known biosynthetic functions are shown next to arrows representing the respective reactions catalyzed by them, and the question mark indicates the unknown protein(s) responsible for the 5S to 5R epimerization and side chain modification of clavam intermediates during clavulanic acid biosynthesis. The two 5S clavam intermediates related to clavaminic acid (R1 = N-glycyl and R2 = N-acetyl-glycyl, respectively), which accumulate in the orf15 and orf16 gene mutants are shown in the dashed box. The early shared portion of the pathway has been well characterized along with the genes involved in the process [19], but specific reactions involved in the production of each type of metabolite are yet to be elucidated [13]. It is currently hypothesized that during clavulanic acid production, the intermediate clavaminic acid undergoes oxidative deamination and ring inversion leading to clavaldehyde (Fig 1), which has 5R stereochemistry and is the immediate precursor of clavulanic acid [20]. The enzymes responsible for clavaldehyde formation are not known, but the products of orf10-17 from the CA-BGC are thought to play a role in the process [13, 17]. Previous reports have shown that the disruption of individual genes from the orf10-17 region abolishes or reduces clavulanic acid production without affecting 5S clavam levels [21–23]. Under certain conditions, the concomitant accumulation of acylated clavaminic acid derivatives was also observed in the orf15-16 mutants [23, 24], suggesting that the respective metabolites are intermediates from the clavulanic acid arm of the biosynthetic pathway (Fig 1). Because of the clinical applications of clavulanic acid, there is considerable interest in understanding how the metabolite is produced in S. clavuligerus. Of particular relevance to the current study is the product of orf12 (SCLAV_4187) from the CA-BGC of S. clavuligerus, which resembles class A β-lactamases and also contains similar SXXK, SDN and KAG amino acid motifs [25]. orf12 is co-transcribed with orf13, which encodes a putative membrane transport protein (Fig 2A), and their relative arrangement also suggests possible translational coupling [23]. Due to the bioactivities of specialized metabolites (especially when the product is an antibacterial), producer organisms often employ self-resistance strategies for protection [26, 27]. Intrinsic resistance in β-lactam-producing organisms is often attributed to the presence of altered penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs, the targets of β-lactam antibiotics) with reduced binding affinities for endogenously-produced antibiotics [28], but BGCs from such organisms also contain genes encoding β-lactamases and efflux transporters [29, 30]. Studies have shown that orf12 is required for clavulanic acid, but not 5S clavam production [23] and that the encoded protein lacks any detectible β-lactamase activity. Instead, heterologously expressed and purified Orf12 was shown to function as a cephalosporin esterase under in vitro conditions [25], due to which it is henceforth referred to as Cpe (for cephalosporin esterase). 10.1371/journal.pone.0215960.g002Fig 2Preparation and analysis of S. clavuligerus cpe deletion mutants.(A and B) The thick arrows depict genes with arrowheads indicating the direction of transcription. (A) The relative arrangement of genes from the chromosomal locus surrounding cpe in S. clavuligerus is shown, and the bent arrows represent the known promoters for the different transcriptional units. The DNA sequences of the overlapping regions between cpe-orf13 (bottom) and orf13-orf14 (top) are indicated in open boxes, whereas the respective start and stop codons are shown in filled boxes. (B) Diagrammatic representation of the Δcpe::apra and Δcpe-INF mutants, which were prepared such that the 5' and 3' ends of cpe were retained and intervening DNA sequences were replaced by an apramycin resistance cassette or an in-frame 81-bp sequence in the respective mutants. (C and D) HPLC analysis of 96 hour wt S. clavuligerus and different cpe mutant SA culture supernatants for assessing clavulanic acid production using the phosphate buffer system [32]. Peaks corresponding to imidazole-derivatized clavulanic acid are indicated by the star symbol, which were detected at 311nm. Preparation and analysis of S. clavuligerus cpe deletion mutants. (A and B) The thick arrows depict genes with arrowheads indicating the direction of transcription. (A) The relative arrangement of genes from the chromosomal locus surrounding cpe in S. clavuligerus is shown, and the bent arrows represent the known promoters for the different transcriptional units. The DNA sequences of the overlapping regions between cpe-orf13 (bottom) and orf13-orf14 (top) are indicated in open boxes, whereas the respective start and stop codons are shown in filled boxes. (B) Diagrammatic representation of the Δcpe::apra and Δcpe-INF mutants, which were prepared such that the 5' and 3' ends of cpe were retained and intervening DNA sequences were replaced by an apramycin resistance cassette or an in-frame 81-bp sequence in the respective mutants. (C and D) HPLC analysis of 96 hour wt S. clavuligerus and different cpe mutant SA culture supernatants for assessing clavulanic acid production using the phosphate buffer system [32]. Peaks corresponding to imidazole-derivatized clavulanic acid are indicated by the star symbol, which were detected at 311nm. The recently solved crystal structure of Cpe showed that in addition to a β-lactamase-like domain located in its C-terminus (residues 128–458), the protein also contains a previously unrecognized N-terminal domain (residues 1–127) resembling those found in steroid isomerases and polyketide cyclases [25]. In addition, two molecules of clavulanic acid were found to be bound non-covalently to Cpe when crystals of the protein were soaked in a solution of the metabolite during structural studies [25]. The first molecule (CA-1) was positioned in an active site pocket lined by residues (His88, Ser173, Thr209, Ser234, Ser278,Met383, Phe374, Ala376 and Phe385) from both the N- and the C-terminal domains, whereas the second molecule (CA-2) bound to a mostly hydrophobic cleft at the interface of the two domains via weak ionic interactions [25]. It was also shown that apart from Ser173, Ser234 and Ser378, other residues from Cpe or its N-terminal domain are not essential for its in vitro esterase activity. The ability of Cpe to bind clavulanic acid non-covalently under in vitro conditions is intriguing [25], as bona fide class A β-lactamases form irreversible covalent suicide adducts with the inhibitor [9]. In addition, β-lactamases are secreted out of the cell to inactive their antibiotic substrates [7], but the cellular location of Cpe in S. clavuligerus is not known. It is also not clear if Cpe undergoes post-translational processing in S. clavuligerus, or if both of its N- and C-terminal domains and associated amino acid residues are required for clavulanic acid production in the native host. Therefore, questions regarding the actual in vivo role of the Cpe gene product still remain unanswered, many of which are examined in the current study.