1. Introduction The emergence of protein therapeutics is being considered as one of the biggest milestones of 20th century medical and pharmaceutical science [1]. Advancement in biotechnology and a better understanding of the pathophysiology of clinical conditions helped several protein and peptide drugs to be recognized as potential therapeutics [2]. The trend is ongoing and in the next few decades, protein and peptide therapeutics will be covering an even bigger share of pharmaceutical products in industry. However, one disturbing fact for protein and peptide therapeutics is that there is a scarcity in noninvasive oral modes of administration. Proteins are naturally hydrophilic molecules with poor absorbance through the intestine and often prone to harsh pH and enzymatic degradation [2]. For example, the first-ever protein molecule used as therapeutic was insulin which, since that time, has been the one and only treatment for type1 diabetes as well as for type2 diabetes mellitus [1]. Yet, the only form of treatment available for insulin is the injectable form. Regular and very frequent subcutaneous (SC) administrations are associated with low patient compliance and multiple injection site injuries. Unfortunately, it is not possible to administrate insulin as an oral tablet. Insulin is a small 51 amino acid peptide molecule that is not resistant to stomach acid or enzymatic degradation. Delivery through the oral route is generally recognized as the delivery of drugs through the GIT where the start point for a drug can be mouth or buccal and the absorption can take place from different parts of the small and large intestine [3]. Popular searches for oral insulin are mostly restricted to direct delivery from mouth to absorption through the small intestinal wall [3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]. The complex GI tract is one single tube intended to serve one single purpose of entry and absorbance of nutrients from an outside source and making them available to the body. The tube is divided into different organs with each organ having its own pH and enzymatic environment. For example, stomach and small intestine pH and secretary enzymes are specialized in modifying and breaking peptide and protein molecules. In this process, these organs destroy any protein drug that goes through them non-discriminatorily [3,11]. The pH and enzymes are considered a primary barrier for oral delivery of insulin and other protein drugs. Another barrier is intestinal absorption of high molecular weight protein in intact form. The intestinal wall is covered with a mucus layer which is a combination of glycoproteins and bicarbonate ions. Beneath the mucus is the epithelium, basement membrane (non-cellular layer), and a layer of submucosa that holds blood vessels and lymphatic ducts. There are different modes of uptake of molecules (phagocytosis, absorption through payer’s patches, or endocytosis by enterocytes) depending on the size, surface charge, hydrophilic or hydrophobic nature of the molecule [3,12]. Absorption of an intact protein fails mostly due to its size and hydrophilic nature. Despite all those setbacks, there have been several strategies proposed to design an oral protein formulation. The concept of attaching a protein molecule to another molecule that envelops and creates a cargo for it is a popular one. Nanoparticle-based strategies are best served for this concept. To be an ideal candidate for oral peptide delivery, a carrier molecule must meet few criteria, such as the ability to bind to a therapeutic molecule, showing adequate resistance to stand stomach harsh pH and enzymatic degradation and capacity to be absorbed through the intestinal wall. Due to the complexity of the task, until now the success rate in designing an oral protein formulation is still very low [3]. A popular choice for oral insulin carriers so far included polymeric nanoparticles, like poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) and its derivatives. Insulin incorporated into a blended polymer of poly fumaric anhydride (FA) and PLGA 50: 50 (FA: PLGA) showed a reduction of glucose load in fasted rats for 3 h [4,5]. Another formulation of HP55-coated capsule containing PLGA/RS nanoparticle- loaded insulin gradually lowered glucose level from 10–15 h [6]. Apart from PLGA particles, there were few successful oral nano-insulin delivery tools reported using chitosan (CS) and its derivatives. PH-sensitive CS particles showed a promising 15 h long effect on blood glucose levels in diabetic rats, however, the effect started with a burst release [7]. Similarly, TBA (thiolated polymer 2-Iminothiolane)-attached CS with incorporated insulin showed a glucose-lowering effect for 24 h in non-diabetic rats [13]. Lysosome-entrapped insulin (LEI) also reported for successful oral insulin formulation [14,15]. Despite the success of the animal model, none of the formulations were qualified for the clinical trial. Most recently, oral insulin 338(1338) has been taken out of the Phase II clinical trial, although the formulation showed a good hyperglycemic grip in patients. Oral insulin 338(1338) was created by a combination of technologies involving amino acid substitution and linking to a carrier molecule. Acylation at 1338 via 18 C fatty acid let the insulin to bind reversibly with albumin which extended its half-life in circulation, while attachment to sodium caprate enhanced the absorption. The clinical trial was discontinued based on the finding that insulin 338(1338) was effective in a very high dose which would make production cost high [16]. However, insulin 338(1338) is the formulation that almost made its way to the market, with the most advanced research made in the oral insulin field to date. Another formulation is insulin tregopil (Biocon), a human insulin analog attached to a methoxy-triethylene-glycol-propionyl moiety linked to the Lys-β29 amino group and formulated with sodium caporate. Administration of 10–30-mg tablets showed promising effects on hyperglycemia. The clinical trial is ongoing and we can learn better about it in a few years. Again, the bioavailability estimated in dogs seems not very high (0.82–0.85%) which is common for oral insulin tablets [17,18]. ORMD-0801 from Oramed was successful in the Phase1 clinical trial and currently in the Phase2 clinical trial. The formulation was prepared by attaching insulin to a permeation enhancer, soybean trypsin inhibitor, and a chelator. Pre-clinical stage bioavailability in animal study was estimated at 5–8% [17,19]. The clinical trial showed a promising effect on controlling blood sugar levels without any noticeable adverse side-effect. Another formulation, Diasome, which can be given both orally and subcutaneously, is liver-targeted. The oral dosing is less effective compared to SC administration [17,20]. The first precipitation-based particle reported for insulin loading for oral delivery was strontium- substituted carbonate apatite which showed limited success in terms of binding and release in in vitro medium [21]. Here we report a novel group of precipitation-based salt particle formulations designed in our lab, having enormous potential as cargo for oral macromolecular drug delivery. There is no harsh temperature or pH processing required during the fabrication process that can contribute to preventing protein degradation or inactivation. In our earlier studies, we reported Group 2 metal sulfate, sulfite, and carbonate as potential delivery vehicles for genetic material and micromolecular drugs to tumor tissue [22,23]. These salt particles are less immunogenic compared to viral vectors and thus considered safer. Moreover, the flexible synthesis conditions make them easily modifiable depending on the target binding molecule and mode of delivery. They have a better drug loading capacity, and the drug release profile can be controlled as well [22]. In this study, we aimed to investigate their effectiveness as delivery vehicles for macromolecular peptides orally. Ba salt particles (BaSO4, BaSO3, and BaCO3) have both positive and negative charged domains conferred, respectively, by cations (Ba2+) and anions (SO42−, SO32−, and CO32−). Due to heterogeneous charge distribution, these particles are capable of binding peptide molecules like insulin through electrostatic interactions. The particles were tested in vitro with excellent protein loading efficiency and release profile. They also demonstrated high resistance to withstand gastrointestinal pH and enzymatic environment along with the ability to efficiently bind mucin, indicating their potential capacity for intestinal absorption. Finally, using a short-acting human insulin analog (insulin aspart), the effectiveness of oral insulin delivery was evaluated for the three different particles in diabetic rats. Among the three candidates, BaSO4 and BaCO3 particles were found to dramatically reduce the existing hyperglycemia, apparently working as the native insulin Aspart subcutaneous formulation in terms of onset and duration of the action.