Introduction SF2487/A80577 (1) (referred to in this manuscript as tetromadurin) is a type I polyketide polyether tetronate isolated independently from Actinomadura verrucosospora by two industrial research groups in the early 1990s [1, 2] (Fig 1). It belongs to the same family of polyether tetronates as tetronasin (2) (produced by Streptomyces longisporoflavus) and tetronomycin (3) (produced by Streptomyces sp. NRRL 11266), which are all characterised by containing a tetronate, cyclohexane, tetrahydropyran, and at least one tetrahydrofuran ring (Fig 1). Tetronasin and tetronomycin are notable for being near- “mirror image” versions of one another, containing the opposite configuration at each of ten equivalent stereocenters. Tetromadurin contains structural elements of each, its cyclohexane and tetrahydropyran rings of tetromadurin having identical configuration to those in tetronasin, while its tetronate ring contains a tetronomycin-like exocyclic double bond. All three compounds, like other polyethers such as monensin, are ionophore antibiotics that disrupt ion signalling across cell membranes [1, 3–5]. In addition, tetromadurin has also demonstrated antiretroviral and antimalarial activity [1, 6]. 10.1371/journal.pone.0239054.g001Fig 1The polyether tetronates tetromadurin (1), tetronasin (2), and tetronomycin (3). The polyether tetronates tetromadurin (1), tetronasin (2), and tetronomycin (3). The high degree of structural similarity between tetromadurin and tetronasin/tetronomycin suggests a similar biosynthetic pathway for its biosynthesis. The biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) responsible for the production of tetronasin (the tsn gene cluster) and tetronomycin (the tmn gene cluster) have both been sequenced (Genbank: FJ462704 and AB193609, respectively) [7, 8]. The tsn and tmn gene clusters both encode five type I polyketide synthase (PKS) enzymes that condense six (2S)-methylmalonyl-CoA and seven malonyl-CoA extension units to form the 26 carbon skeletons of tetronasin and tetronomycin. In addition, both gene clusters also encode enzymes for creation of the four ring types, an O-methyltransferase for the C26 methoxy group, and a cyctochrome P450 for the primary hydroxyl group (C30 in tetronasin 2 and C28 in tetronomycin 3) [7, 8]. In contrast, on the basis of its structure we predicted that the 31-carbon polyketide skeleton of tetromadurin is synthesised using six malonyl-CoA, eight (2S)-methylmalonyl-CoA, and one uncommon (2R)-methoxymalonyl-ACP (acyl-carrier protein) unit (S1 Fig). Also, unlike tetronasin and tetronomycin, tetromadurin contains two primary hydroxyl groups (positions C36 and C38) and two tetrahydrofuran rings. We have performed whole-genome sequencing of A. verrucosospora to identify the biosynthetic gene cluster responsible for tetromadurin biosynthesis (the mad gene cluster). Bioinformatic analysis of the individual genes within the mad gene cluster enabled us to propose a complete pathway for tetromadurin biosynthesis. Furthermore, the PKS enzymes encoded by the mad gene cluster indicate an unusual case where one of the ketoreductase (KR) domains appears to act externally from its parent module. To functionally validate the mad gene cluster, independent in-frame deletions were made in the putative cyclase genes mad10 and mad31. Deletion of either of these genes abolished tetromadurin production. In addition, mass spectrometry analysis of the A. verrucosospora Δmad10 mutant indicated the production of a late-stage tetromadurin biosynthetic intermediate lacking the cyclohexane and tetrahydropyran rings and one primary hydroxyl group, analogous to the intermediate recently characterised from a S. longisporoflavus Δtsn11 mutant [7]. Taken together, our findings clarify several aspects of tetromadurin biosynthesis, including identifying its biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC), determining the relative order of the two cytochrome P450-catalyzed hydroxylations, and supporting a conserved mechanism of cyclohexane and tetrahydropyran formation in polyether tetronate biosynthesis.