INTRODUCTION DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are highly cytotoxic lesions induced by endogenous and environmental genotoxic agents that covalently tether two bases on opposite strands of the DNA double helix (1,2). This kind of lesion seriously impairs DNA replication and transcription by blocking DNA strand separation, resulting in chromosomal mutations, rearrangements, instability, and even cell death (3). Rapidly dividing cells, such as tumour cells, are hypersensitive to ICL damage, which has led to the extensive clinical application of many well-known ICL inducers in cancer treatment (4,5). Unlike the repair of simple DNA damage, a large number of proteins responsible for multiple specialized DNA repair mechanisms, including nucleotide excision repair (NER), homologous recombination, translesion synthesis, mismatch repair and base excision repair (BER), can all be recruited to repair ICLs (3,6). Different ICL repair proteins are involved depending on the structure of the ICL, the cell cycle phase and the biological species. New factors implicated in ICL repair continued to be discovered with sustained advances in the research of these complex mechanisms in recent years. ICLs are serious challenges to the ability of all living cells to maintain the chemical integrity of their genome. However, ICL agent-producing microorganisms can easily mitigate the danger by employing diverse self-protection machineries. For instance, the clinical anticancer drug mitomycin C (MMC) producer, Streptomyces lavendulae, is known to be protected by the encoded products of three genes, mcrA, mrd and mct, via reoxidation of the active reduced MMC, retention/sequestration of the native prodrug, and drug efflux, respectively (7–9). The drug binding protein BlmA and the N-acetyltransferase BlmB confer resistance to bleomycin in Streptomyces verticillus, the bleomycin-producing strain, through drug sequestration and inactivation (10). In addition to the proteins acting on drugs, DNA repair enzymes, such as the UvrA-like proteins (SgcB2 for C-1027 resistance, DrrC for daunorubicin resistance, and CmrX for chromomycin resistance) and the DNA glycosylase homologue (YtKR2 for yatakemycin resistance) derived from the biosynthetic gene clusters of DNA-targeting drugs, have been recently reported to be implicated in the drug self-resistance of the producing strains (11–15). Azinomycin B (AZB), a highly genotoxic agent with two reactive groups, which includes an active epoxide moiety and an unusual aziridine ring (5,16–20), has prominent in vivo antitumor activity and in vitro cytotoxicity comparable to that of MMC (21). Its excellent biological activity appears to be derived from the formation of covalent ICLs in the major groove between guanine and purine residues in the duplex DNA sequence 5′-d(GNPy)-3′ via tandem electrophilic attacks of C10 in the aziridine ring and C21 in the epoxide moiety (16) (Supplementary Figure S1). Our previous research identified a new type of DNA glycosylase, Orf1, also known as Azi36 and AlkZ, which unhooks AZB-ICL by enzymatic cleavage of the N-glycosidic bond at the crosslinking site and thus confers self-resistance on the AZB producer, Streptomyces sahachiroi (22,23). Herein, we report another new structure-specific nucleoside cleavage enzyme identified from the AZB self-resistance system, which is a product encoded by orf3/azi38 (renamed aziN, GenBank accession number MK453398) located near the orf1/alkZ gene. Initially, AziN was considered to be involved in self-resistance by drug sequestration. However, upon further analysis, it was demonstrated to specifically recognize the AZB-ICLs by drug binding and unhook them via cleaving the phosphodiester bonds on at least one side of the lesion. The cleavage mode of this newly discovered endonuclease was later determined by a series of in vitro experiments.