1. Introduction Marine-derived fungi can produce diverse natural products with different bioactives and have become a more and more important resource of leading compounds over the past years [1]. Diketopiperazine derivatives show a wide range of biological activities, including antiviral, antituberculosis, anticancer, and antibacterial activities [2,3]. Plinabulin, a synthetic diketopiperazine analogue derived from marine fungus Aspergillus sp. CNC-139, has entered phase III clinical studies for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer, indicating the bright prospect of gliotoxin derivatives in drug development [4,5,6]. Gliotoxin, derived from fungi, is a typical epipolythiodioxopiperazine (ETP) toxin with a disulphide-bridged cyclic dipeptide, and is responsible for the cytotoxicity [7,8]. Moreover, gliotoxins and their derivates can utilize the disulfide bond of ETP compounds to mediate redox homeostasis or the modification of proteins, including nuclear factor-kB, triphosphopyridine nucleotide (NADPH) oxidase, histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) methyltransferase, and glutaredoxin [9]. In addition to the diverse extraordinary structures and bioactivities of gliotoxins, the biosynthesis pathways of gliotoxins and relevant genes have been identified in Aspergillus fumigatus, which would provide theoretical guidance for multiple functional genomic studies in other fungi [8,9]. The putative gene cluster (gli) of gliotoxin is composed of 13 genes that encode crucial enzymes responsible for the biosynthesis of various gliotoxins and their derivatives in A. fumigatus [9]. The non-ribosomal peptide synthetase encoded by gliP gene catalyzes diketopiperazine scaffold formation, the first biosynthetic reaction in a gliotoxin biosynthesis pathway [10]. Subsequently, cytochrome P450 monooxygenase encoded by gliC catalyzes the hydroxylation at the α-carbon of L-Phe [11]. Then, glutathione S-transferase (GST) encoded by the gliG promotes the sulfurization of gliotoxin biosynthetic imtermediates; GST is known for its ability in the catalyzation of carbon–sulfur bond formation, as opposed to detoxification [12,13]. After the process by the enzymes of GliK and GliJ, the γ-glutamyl moieties are removed [14,15]. The carbon–sulfur lyase expressed by the gliI gene then catalyzes the intermediate to generate a notorious epidithiol moiety [16]. After the catalysis of cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (GliF or GliC) and GliH (function remains elusive), the N-methyltransferase encoded by gliN or gliM functions as a freestanding amide to promote amide methylation and confer stability on ETP [17,18]. Finally, the oxidoreductase GliT-mediated disulfide bridge closure might be a prerequisite for the formation of gliotoxins, and the major facilitator superfamily transporter GliA also plays an important role in exporting the toxins to prevent the harmful effect of gliotoxin on hosts [9,19]. Many regulators involved in gliotoxin biosynthesis pathway have been identified in A. fumigatus, regardless of whether they deploy a non-gli cluster or a gli cluster. GtmA (or termed TtmA) is encoded outside the gli cluster and functions as a bis-thiomethyl transferase for the conversion of dithiogliotoxin to bisdethiobis (methylthio) gliotoxin (BmGT), which mainly attenuates the formation of disulfide bridge closure [20]. Other non-gli clusters encoding transcription factors, including the global regulator laeA, C2H2 regulator mtfA, bZIP transcription factor rsmA, and APSES family transcription factor stuA, can regulate the biosynthesis of gliotoxins and their derivatives to some extent [9]. The critical transcription factor GliZ encoded by the gliZ gene in the gli cluster is a sequence-specific DNA-binding binuclear zinc cluster (Zn2Cys6) protein, which is uniquely found in fungi. GliZ is a positive regulator that is indispensable in the gliotoxin biosynthesis [21]. Moreover, the overexpression of the gliZ gene leads to the accumulation of gliotoxins and their derivatives, and the gliZ deletion impedes the production of gliotoxins. The binding site (TCGGN3CCGA) of GliZ is usually located within the promoter region of the gli cluster [7,21,22,23]. Although the regulatory function of gliZ has been preliminarily demonstrated through in vivo experiments, the specific promoter and the evaluation of binding affinities between gli gene promoters and GliZ remain obscure. Therefore, it is of great significance to elucidate the regulatory mechanism of GliZ by in vitro analysis of the interaction of GliZ with promoters in the gliotoxin biosynthetic cluster in different fungi. Different kinds of gliotoxins and their derivatives including rare gliotoxin dimers were isolated from Dichotomomyces cejpii (Milko) Scott in our previous study, and some showed significant cytotoxic activities against tumor cell lines and high inhibitory activity against α-glucosidase [24,25,26], which exhibited the potential to be developed as leading compounds for drugs in the future. However, the novel transcriptional factor GliZ in the gli cluster responsible for the gliotoxin biosynthesis in D. cejpii (DcGliZ) remains unclear, which is unfavorable for the elucidation of the biosynthetic and regulatory mechanism of gliotoxins and their derivatives in D. cejpii. Thus, it is urgent to investigate the regulatory function of this transcriptional factor GliZ in D. cejpii. To explore the specific regulatory mechanism of GliZ for the gliotoxins biosynthetic genes in the gli cluster, thus facilitating the biosynthesis of new gliotoxin derivatives in the future, an effective approach for identifying the function and regulatory mechanism of DcGliZ (accession number: MK558823) was proposed in this study. Using the whole genome sequencing data of the deep-sea-derived fungus D. cejpii FS110, the available gliotoxin synthetic gene cluster and its relevant transcriptional factor DcGliZ were predicted. Moreover, the binding abilities of DcGliZ to promoters of genes in the gli cluster was assayed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) assays. This is the first report on the investigation of the interaction between DcGliZ and the promoters of gliotoxins biosynthetic genes in the gli cluster in vitro, and the disclosure of the binding levels between transcriptional factor DcGliZ and gliG, gliM, and gliN promoters by measuring the equilibrium dissociation constant (KD). Our study would promote the elucidation of the gliotoxin biosynthetic mechanism, and provide a platform for the precise regulation of the gli cluster to control gliotoxin production and excavate new gliotoxin derivatives through the regulation of DcGliZ expression and the mutation of promoters for gliotoxins biosynthesis.