INTRODUCTION Geobacteraceae, a family within the Deltaproteobacteria, predominantly reside in anaerobic environments, such as aquatic sediments, anaerobic wastewater, contaminated aquifers, and rice paddy soils, where they play a key role in the biogeochemical cycling of metals, sulfur, and carbon (1–8). Their relatively high abundance in these environmental niches (9–12) demonstrates their competitiveness in complex microbial communities. This stems from their metabolic flexibility which allows them to thrive under electron donor and nutrient-poor conditions (11, 13–16) and their adaptive ability to navigate toward metals via chemotaxis using flagella and pili (17). Furthermore, their enhanced ability to reduce insoluble electron acceptors of high redox potential via extracellular electron transfer (2, 6, 11), made possible by their hundreds of encoded c-type cytochromes and electrically conductive pili (18, 19), equip them with a competitive advantage to survive within mixed communities and conditions unfavorable for most organisms. Although these physiological traits allow them to establish a dominant foothold in many of their environments, bacteria of this family, Geobacteraceae, are also adept at forming syntrophic interactions with other microorganisms. These can be formed via direct interspecies electron transfer (DIET), which utilizes c-type cytochromes and pili, hydrogen interspecies transfer-utilizing hydrogenases, or formate interspecies transfer utilizing formate dehydrogenase (20–23). Some of the studied interactions between Geobacter spp. and other species include G. sulfurreducens and G. metallireducens (23), G. sulfurreducens and Rhodoferax ferrireducens (24), G. metallireducens and Clostridium beijerinckii (25), G. sulfurreducens and Escherichia coli (26), G. sulfurreducens and Clostridium pasteurianum (27), and G. sulfurreducens and Wolinella succinogenes (28). Such studies aid in improving metabolic models of microbial communities. Similar to Geobacter spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains have also been found to participate in interspecies electron transfer, where P. aeruginosa endogenously produced phenazine shuttles electrons to electron-accepting bacteria (29, 30). Besides electron shuttling, Pseudomonas sp. phenazines are also known for their antibiotic properties, as are a multitude of other molecules they secrete (31, 32). P. aeruginosa and G. sulfurreducens have been found to coexist in many of the same environments, such as salt marsh estuaries, aquatic sediments, wastewater, and contaminated groundwater (33–38). Their potential for interaction, however, has only recently been investigated. Our recent adaptive evolution study on cocultures of G. sulfurreducens and P. aeruginosa found that several electron transfer processes were possible with the evolution of serially transferred cocultures, which progressively increased in fitness (39). Initially, DIET was the predominant form of syntrophic interaction. As they underwent 13 serial transfers, G. sulfurreducens upregulated its formate dehydrogenase (FdnG) and hydrogenase (HybA) enzymes, allowing for formate or hydrogen to be utilized as electron donors and suggesting an increase in its metabolic flexibility. This study sought to understand the impact on the dynamics of interaction and the genetic basis of these observed changes. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and quantitative PCR (qPCR) revealed an increase in the dominance of Geobacter spp. over coculture evolution, indicating a shift from syntrophy to competition. Whole-genome sequencing showed rapid selection for genetic variants in the Geobacter fabI and tetR genes. A frameshift mutation in tetR was coincident with significant upregulation of an adenylate cyclase-hemolysin transporter gene (cyaE) and a resistance-nodulation-division (RND) efflux pump (GSU0949), both located in a predicted TetR-regulated operon (40). TetR family transcriptional repressors are known for their role in regulating efflux pumps and transporters of antibiotics or toxic chemicals (41). Here, we find that G. sulfurreducens growth is inhibited by P. aeruginosa-derived phenazine-1-carboxylic acid (PHZ-1-CA). Selection of tetR and fabI variants is not explained by PHZ-1-CA. In agreement with this, we observe these variants to be present in phz-deficient cocultures. This suggests that other phenazine derivatives or nonphenazine antimicrobials secreted by P. aeruginosa drive the selection of these variants or, alternatively, there is an as-yet-unidentified role for RND efflux pump and adenylate cyclase upregulation in these cocultures.