INTRODUCTION Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a common chronic disorder in older adults and poses a severe threat to their health [1]. Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy (DPN), which occurs in 44% of older diabetics, is one of the most prevalent and devastating complications of diabetes [2]. DPN often presents earlier and more frequently than other diabetic complications, manifesting as a distal, symmetric, sensorimotor neuropathy with abnormal sensations such as paresthesias, allodynia, hyperalgesia, and spontaneous pain [3]. Currently, intensive glycemic control and symptomatic treatment are the only therapies available for DPN [4]. Although Neurotropin® (NTP), a non-protein extract from the inflamed skin of rabbits inoculated with vaccinia virus, is used to treat neuropathic pain and peripheral inflammation in DPN patients [5], it is not suitable as a long-term treatment due to the possibility of digestive and nervous systems side effects [6]. More effective treatments for DPN are therefore urgently needed. Recent advancements in microbial sequencing, metagenomics, and bioinformatics have revealed an important relationship between gut flora and diabetes [7]. Evidence from multiple animal models and populations has confirmed that differences in gut microbiota composition between diabetic and healthy hosts contribute to various diabetic complications [8, 9]. However, few studies have investigated the role of gut microbiota on the development of DPN. Drugs that act on gut microbiota have emerged as therapies for diabetes and its complications [10]. Since traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) is mainly delivered by oral administration, the natural compounds in TCM can interact extensively with the gut microbiota [11]. Several studies have demonstrated that TCM alleviates diabetes symptoms by preserving gut microbiota homeostasis. For example, TCM treatments increased levels of some short-chain fatty acid-producing bacteria and anti-inflammatory bacteria in the gut of diabetic hosts [12, 13]. Jinmaitong (JMT) is a compound prescription used in TCM to treat DPN. Our previous ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UPLC-QTOF-MS) analysis revealed that flavonoid and its glycosides, triterpenoids, and phenolic acids are the main constituents of JMT [14]. Several chemical components in JMT have been reported to be able to alleviate DPN both in vivo and in vitro [15–18]. Besides, the flavonoids and their glycosides identified in JMT were best known as strong antioxidants and could attenuate different kinds of neuropathic pain in behavioral, physiological, and biochemical tests [19]. Evidence from preclinical studies indicates that JMT improves nerve conduction velocity as well as pain and temperature sensation in DPN rats [20–22]. These results were confirmed in a double-blind randomized controlled trial, which demonstrated that JMT not only significantly improved blood glucose and lipid metabolism, and nerve conduction velocity in DPN patients, but also markedly ameliorated clinical symptoms such as cold, numbness, and pain of the extremities in DPN patients [22, 23]. However, these studies did not fully illustrate the therapeutic mechanism of JMT or the role of gut microbiota modulation in its neuroprotective effects. In this study, we investigated the effects of JMT on gut microbiota in streptozocin (STZ)-induced DPN rats with gut dysbiosis. Fecal 16S rRNA gene sequencing was used to compare gut microbiota composition among normal control rats, distilled water-treated DPN rats, and JMT-treated DPN rats, so that to identify microbial species that contributed to the development of DPN or the neuroprotective effects of JMT. Data from our study deepen the understanding of the therapeutic mechanism of JMT on modulation of gut microbiota in DPN subjects and provide new evidence for the clinical application of the potential DPN therapy.