1. Introduction The global spread of antibiotic resistance (AR) is one of the most urgent problems faced by humanity, particularly relevant to the so-called ESKAPE pathogens (Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species). Globally, antibiotic-resistant infections cause 31.5 million sepsis cases resulting in 5.3 million deaths annually [1]. Hence, the World Health Assembly endorsed a global action plan to tackle AR [2]. The efficient counteraction of the AR problem demands the creation of new molecular tools with antibacterial activity. While classical platforms for antibiotic discovery have been successfully applied, providing the majority of antibiotics on the market [3], a new paradigm of studying microbiome function at the single-cell level is required [4]. Recently, we proposed a concept of deep functional microbiome profiling based on single-cell cultivation of microorganisms encapsulated in isolated compartments of a double water-in-oil-in-water emulsion, combined with subsequent probing of their functionality [5]. Previously, ultrahigh-throughput profiling of bacterial communities for anti-Staphylococcus activity enabled isolating particular clones with the highest level of antibiotic production [6]. The application of this technology to the screening of the exotic microbiome of the East Siberian brown bear (Ursus arctos collaris) resulted in the isolation of Bacillus pumilus strains efficiently producing the antibiotic amicoumacin A (Ami) [5]. While Ami was discovered in the 1980s [7,8,9], its mechanism of action and molecular target remained ambiguous for a long time [10] and were precisely determined just recently [11]. Ami efficiently targets both pro- and eukaryotic ribosomes [11,12], resulting in similar minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) and IC50 values for Ami-sensitive bacterial strains and human cell lines, respectively [12]. This cytotoxicity restricts its application as an antibiotic on the one hand and provides a perspective agent targeting mammalian translation on the other. However, Ami was reported as an effective anti-inflammatory and antiulcer agent [7], which was subsequently associated with its anti-Helicobacter pylori activity [13]. Numerous Bacillus strains produce Ami [14] and are applied as probiotics to enhance gastrointestinal health [13] or to prevent Vibrio infections in aquaculture [15,16]. Whereas the immunostimulatory effects of Bacillus resulting in an increase in IgA level were reported [17], the antibiotic activity of Ami is a more straightforward and documented reason for the efficacy of Ami-producing Bacillus probiotics [15,16]. The origin of Ami biosynthesis has been of interest for a long time [14]. However, Ami biosynthetic gene cluster was firstly identified in Bacillus subtilis not so long ago [18]. Recently, we described a related Ami cluster in B. pumilus, clarifying the mechanisms mediating Ami biosynthesis in Bacilli [5]. A multi-omics approach applied to discover the regulation of Ami production revealed an increased level of the putative AmiP transporter, activating the peptidase AmiB [18,19,20], and a reversed balance between the kinase AmiN and the phosphatase AmiO upon activation of Ami biosynthesis [5]. Finally, we showed that AmiN (EC 2.7.1.230) and AmiO (EC 3.1.3.107) are responsible for self-resistance and corresponding Ami activation. In this paper, we focused on the optimization of B. pumilus cultivation conditions for improved high-scale production of Ami based on the proteomics and metabolomics data obtained previously [5]. A combination of increased aeration, high-carbohydrate medium, and calcium carbonate microparticles mimicking the thin-layer cultivation previously described was efficiently applied to activate Ami biosynthesis and boost its production. The optimized cultivation conditions were implemented for high-scale preparation of Ami, simplifying the downstream purification based on reversed-phase solid-phase extraction (SPE) and HPLC. The purified Ami was used for the evaluation of its antibacterial potential using standard cultivation assays and AR-based deep functional profiling of microbiomes. Ami activity spectrum was studied previously [7,10,13,15], indicating potent activity of Ami against H. pylori, Vibrio, and S. aureus strains, including MRSA. We expand this data illustrating that Ami is active against numerous Gram-positive bacteria, including the overwhelming majority of pathogenic Enterococcus and Staphylococcus strains. However, we suggest that the application of Ami as an antibiotic or anticancer agent is problematic, since it has low stability in aqueous solutions at physiological pH. We observed the sequential transformation of Ami into AmiC and AmiB, which are inactive metabolites of Ami (lactone and carboxylic acid, respectively). The outstanding instability of the terminal amide of Ami originates from its intramolecular self-lactonization. This process is exceptionally efficient in the case of Ami, decreasing its half-life to less than 2 h at physiological conditions. We speculate that this self-lactonization is so productive because of the formation of the energetically favorable five-membered transition state. Moreover, the proximate protonated amine group enhances this effect. Hence, we consider that self-lactonization serves as an improvised intermediate state, substantially decreasing the energetic barrier of amide hydrolysis. While the exact mechanism of this reaction should be detailed in the future, a balance between antibiotic potency and stability seems to be necessary for Ami-producing Bacillus. However, it represents a great obstacle for the practical application of Ami as an antibiotic and anticancer drug.