1. Introduction Lignocellulosic biomass is an abundant bio-renewable, carbon-neutral resource. It is the basis for alternative energy platforms with the potential to decrease CO2 emissions and atmospheric pollution by reducing the usage of fossil fuels [1]. Due to the abundance and availability of lignocellulosic biomass, lignocellulosic-derived cellulosic ethanol represents a significant and inexpensive petroleum fuel alternative [2]. Lignocellulosic derived glucose is a potential feed stock for a wide variety of biologically produced chemicals and bio fuels [3]. Cellulase has been widely used in various industrial applications such as the food, animal feed, beer and wine, textile, laundry industry pulp, paper, agriculture, bio-fuel, and pharmaceutical industries amongst others [4]. Lignocellulosic biomass comprises of three major components: cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. Cellulose can be hydrolyzed by a group of enzymes referred to as cellulases, which themselves are classified within carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes), including exoglucanase, endoglucanase, and β glucosidase [5]. Endoglucanases, or Endo-1, 4-β-d-glucanase (EC 3.2.1.4), act on amorphous sites. cleave randomly at internal glycoside bonds to generate both reducing and non-reducing ends of cellulose. Exoglucanase, or 1,4-β-d-cellobiohydrolase (EC 3.2.1.91), hydrolyzes the reducing or non-reducing ends of cellulose, liberating either cellobiose or glucose as the major products. β-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.21) is a key enzyme for complete hydrolyzing of cellobiose to liberate free glucose molecules [5]. Increases in cellulase production have been achieved through a number of different approaches such as classical strain improvement (CSI), metabolic engineering, and synthetic biology [6]. While CSI is robust, it is also time consuming, laborious, and depends on either mutagenesis followed by phenotypic screening for improved characteristics, or manipulation of desired genes known to play a significant role in the desired phenotype [7]. Genome shuffling is an efficient tool to generate improved strains, whereby the genome of multiple parent strains is shuffled through recursive recombination. This can be achieved by multi-parental crossing though DNA shuffling with a homologous recombination of entire genomes, analogous to conventional breeding [8]. Through this process, microbial genome shuffling efficiently generates combinatorial libraries of new strains with diverse genetic potential. Hence, this approach is able to produce strains with improved characteristics and efficiencies in respect to desirable phenotypes. For example, genome shuffling improved the production of Tylosin by Streptomycin fradie, which has been estimated to reduce an approximately twenty year and a one million strain screen classical approach to just a year and 24,000 screens [9]. Over the past decade, applications of genome shuffling have extended to various sectors, such as the health care, pharmaceutical, food, agriculture, textile and chemical industries. It has been used to enhance microbial stress and acid tolerance, as well as antibiotic production. The greatest advantage of genome shuffling is that many genes and their regulatory units can be randomly changed throughout the entire genome without prior knowledge of genome sequence information [10]. Initially this method was developed for bacteria and was later extended to yeast and fungi. For example, reports using genome shuffling include increased antifungal activity in Lactobacillus plantarum [11], increased acetic acid tolerance of ethanologenic yeast Candida krusei GL560 [12], and increased production of cellulase production in Trichoderma viride [13]. Although fungi are the common sources of cellulases, cellulases from other microorganisms are being explored [14,15]. This is important because of the varied applications of cellulases in diverse backgrounds (paper, textiles, food, etc.). The diversity of microorganisms can cater to the varied conditions prevailing in different industrial applications. Further, the efforts to reduce cost and improve efficiency require better enzymes. Members of Bacillus sp. are known to produce cellulases [14,16,17]. They may be advantageous because of their fast growth. Further, the genomes are simple and convenient to manipulate. B. subtilis is known to possess numerous CAZymes (www.cazy.org; File S3), with the B. subtilis subspecies spizizenii str.W23, B. subtilis B. subsp. natto BEST195, and B. subtilis subsp subtilis str.168 having between 125 and 145 [18,19]. B. subtilis has also been utilized as a source for endogluconases, and thermostable β-glucosidases, with potential for improving bioethanol production [20,21]. Any mutations in the structural genes for cellulase activity or other CAZymes may influence the cellulase activity. In this study, .genome shuffling was chosen to enhance the cellulase production in Bacillus subtilis VS15. Subsequently, the genetic variation between the wild VS15 and the mutant Gd7 strains was identified by using whole genome sequencing. We have sequenced assembly and annotated the whole genomes of both wild and mutant strains (VS15 and Gd7), and performed the comparative genome analysis with reference strain Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis str. 168 as a model cellulase producer. The present study is a first attempt to improve the cellulase production in Bacillus subtilis strains through genome shuffling and comparative analysis between improved and wild strain by using whole genome resequencing.