Introduction With the rapid development of intensive culture, antibiotics have been widely used in feed for promoting growth and for disease prevention purposes. However, antibiotics in animal tissues are absorbed incompletely; parts of antibiotics are excreted in urine and feces (Qiu et al., 2016). Antibiotic residues cause serious pollution to the environment, pose a threat to human health, and even have toxic side effects (Sarmah et al., 2006). If the residual antibiotics in the environment do not degrade effectively, these residues may help to maintain or develop antibiotic-resistant microbial populations (Witte, 1998). Additionally, the migration of antibiotics in the environment has led to the spread of resistant genes as a new type of environmental pollutant. Manure carrying antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) can enter soil, following direct land application (Fang et al., 2015). Many studies have shown that the diversity and abundance of ARGs in soil with long-term application of livestock manure has increased significantly (Ji et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2016), and ARGs in farmland have also increased significantly (Wang et al., 2014; Mu et al., 2015). Therefore, the removal of ARGs from swine manure has emerged as an environmental issue before its application to soil. Aerobic composting is one of the most effective ways to realize the harmless and resourceful treatment of livestock and poultry manure. Aerobic composting can significantly reduce the concentration of antibiotics in animal manure (Ray et al., 2017), but there is little research on whether ARGs can undergo compost removal. Previous studies show that aerobic composting has various effects on different ARGs (Joy et al., 2014; Su et al., 2015). It has been found that the relative abundances of the tetracycline resistance genes and sulfonamide resistance genes were significantly reduced during the swine manure composting, while quinolone resistance gene still partially remained (Selvam et al., 2012). Thus, composting is most likely an effective way to remove ARGs. Microbes are the main carriers of ARGs. Several studies have used 16S rRNA sequencing technology to analyze the relationship between ARGs and microbial communities in compost (Jia et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016). A large number of studies have shown that exogenous microbial agents can accelerate the composting process and shorten the composting cycle (Nakasaki et al., 2013; Ravindran et al., 2019). However, the current research focuses more on the observation of the application effect of a single functional strain (Zeng et al., 2010). And the impact of inoculation on ARGs is even less studied. Only Duan et al. (2019) studied the effects of Bacillus subtilis on ARGs and mobile genetic elements (MGEs) during cattle manure composting. But in practical application, the addition of compound microbial agents is often used to accelerate the composting process. Previous study also showed that compound microbial inoculants can improve composting efficiency of organic solid wastes (Ravindran et al., 2019). Our previous studies have found that Bacillus is the main dominant bacterium in the high-temperature period of primitive composting (Yi et al., 2012). Exogenous Bacillus spp. may prolong the high-temperature composting time and better kill resistant microorganisms. Thus, in the present study, we delved into the effects of Bacillus compound microbial inoculants on composting microbial communities and ARGs. At present, research on these effects has not been reported. The main aims of the present study were: (1) to investigate the quantitative variation and spatial distribution of ARGs in different periods and different height layers in compost, (2) to use 16S rRNA gene sequencing technology to investigate the dynamic changes of bacterial community structure and composition in compost with the addition of a compound microbial inoculants, and (3) to analyze the correlation between microbial community changes and ARGs. We also detected the relative abundances of pathogenic bacteria during composting. The results of this study may help with the development of high-efficiency microbial agents for the control of ARGs, which is of great significance to guide the application of microbial agents in composting and to further improve composting efficiency.