1. Introduction Mycobacterium is a genus of Actinobacteria, acid-fast, aerobic, and nonmotile bacteria. This genus contains opportunistic pathogens known to cause serious diseases, especially in the clinical setting. Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the etiological agent of tuberculosis is one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in humans [1]. In 80–90% of the cases, these aerobic bacilli enter the lungs, while other extrapulmonary organs, primarily lymph nodes, bones, joints, and the genitourinary system are affected as well [2]. The primary route of transmission of the bacilli into the human lungs is via aerosol droplets [3,4,5]. According to WHO report, globally, about 10 million active tuberculosis cases, resulting in about 1.6 million deaths, further aggravated by drug-resistant tuberculosis and/or comorbidities with diabetes and HIV are present [6]. Drug-resistant tuberculosis is a growing threat to public health. Around half a million new rifampicin-resistant tuberculosis cases (78%—multidrug-resistant tuberculosis) emerged in 2018. Globally, 3.4% of new cases of tuberculosis had multidrug-resistant tuberculosis or rifampicin-resistant tuberculosis (MDR/RR-TB) and 18% of previously treated patients [6,7]. In 2018, an estimated 1.2 million deaths from tuberculosis were reported in HIV negative persons, while further 251,000 deaths among HIV-positive cases [6] were observed. Tuberculosis coinfection with HIV also raises the risk of relapse per year by up to 10%. Therefore, in patients with HIV coinfection, tuberculosis is the primary cause of death [7]. Antibiotic therapy prolongation contributes to the development of antibiotic resistance. Drug-resistant tuberculosis is an emerging public health threat in many countries of the world. Moreover, the extended duration of antibiotic treatment raises the risk of noncompliance, adverse effects, and drug toxicity. Therefore, it is urgent to find a way to strengthen the current antibiotic therapy regimen against drug-resistant tuberculosis [8]. The process of novel drug development to fight out the resistant strains of tubercular infections has been considered for a long time, and some of the significant candidates are in various stages of clinical trials [9]. Unfortunately, the drug development and approval processes are too lengthy, and these agents are often generally not as effective as expected. In tuberculosis chemotherapy, the other major problem is the relative refractory of mycobacteria to killing by antibiotics or immune systems and the development of resistant strains [10]. Recent advancements in molecular biology and mycobacterial disease immunopathogenesis have contributed to substantial studies in such research areas. Numerous vaccines are manufacturing for prevention or therapeutic purposes [11,12]. We should, however, wait in the coming years for accessible and reliable vaccines. The problematic scenario is the relationship among the host cells and tubercle bacilli afterwards the primary infection occurs, which results in latent tuberculosis infection in most cases. As described earlier, the human body can contain the disease in >80% of the cases, and the bacilli remain dormant throughout infected peoples’ entire lives. This phenomenon has been the topic of extensive research [13,14,15]. It is worth mentioning that the WHO, international organizations, educational agencies, foundations, and sponsors are working together to resolve dissimilar facets of the topic and to accomplish the anticipated goals in the approaching periods. The development of drug-resistant strains of mycobacterium tuberculosis illustrates the importance and demand for an early identification of drug-resistant strains, exploring new targets for drug sensitivity, customized treatment plans, and more effective medical interventions. Literature shows several studies, incorporating bioinformatics and proteomics approaches that clearly indicate the potential drug targets and an early diagnostic against drug-resistant strains [16,17,18,19,20]. To tackle the alarming condition of antimicrobial resistance, pathogen-centric approach covering novel chemotherapeutics and novel diagnostic pathways, along with host targeted therapeutics (i.e., host immune system modulators to treat pathogenesis), must be appraised [21,22,23,24,25]. The efficacy of novel chemotherapeutic agents (i.e., delamanid and bedaquiline), which currently have approval from USFDA, are now compromised by the successional pathogen tolerance strategies [26,27,28,29,30]. Novel antitubercular repurposed drugs as combinational treatment solutions (new anti-TB drug schedules) and host-directed therapeutics may be measured to tackle the antibiotic resistance, which is a major problem to tuberculosis management. To combat the antibiotic resistance, the key problem in tuberculosis management, we have to identify the most promising lead compounds among new emerging antitubercular agents and conclude these compounds to clinical trials as potential antitubercular drug candidates, along with considering the host-targeted therapeutics. The use of accelerated molecular microbiological techniques will be the near future of tuberculosis management [12]. Drug tests for susceptibility tests may be either phenotypic or genotypic. Phenotypic tests for drug susceptibility are commonly used with prime focus on measuring bacterial growth with first-line, e.g., isoniazid, ethambutol (EMB), rifampicin, and streptomycin [SM]), or second-line antitubercular medicines at defined concentrations. This method has certain advantages that it is fast and economical, but has disadvantage of substantial interruptions and is not reliable for use of ethambutol and other medicine. Genotypical strategies take benefit of particular transmutations relevant to the response against specific medications [13]. Molecular approaches should be conducted using sputum or any other samples and can yield results in a very short period of time (including drug susceptibility). The most used strategies are discussed below:GenXpert MTB/RIF is an assay for nucleic acid amplification in sputum sample that analyses DNA and RIF resistance for the presence of mycobacterium tuberculosis. It is a very simple and reproducible procedure with 90% sensitivity and 99% accuracy. The GenXpert is an automated assay and requires no laboratory arrangements. Rifampicin resistance detection is also used for the prediction of MDR-tuberculosis with isoniazid resistance (in most of the cases) [14]. As an initial diagnostic examination, the WHO recently proposed GenXpert for patients with HIV supposed to have tuberculosis or for those who are at risk for rifampicin resistance and/or MDR tuberculosis. GenXpert (MTB/RIF) Ultra is theoretically facilitating, more precise, and sensitive bedside testing that can enhance tuberculosis detection in smear-negative patients, and similar assays are currently under development.Line probe assay (LPA), approved by WHO, is family of DNA strip-based tests for swift recognition of first- and second-line antitubercular agents drug resistance [31]. It can also be used for testing culture isolates along with direct testing of acid-fast bacilli as well as smear-positive and -negative sputum specimens. LPA can determine the frequently identified mutations in resistant strains [14,15]. GenXpert MTB/RIF is an assay for nucleic acid amplification in sputum sample that analyses DNA and RIF resistance for the presence of mycobacterium tuberculosis. It is a very simple and reproducible procedure with 90% sensitivity and 99% accuracy. The GenXpert is an automated assay and requires no laboratory arrangements. Rifampicin resistance detection is also used for the prediction of MDR-tuberculosis with isoniazid resistance (in most of the cases) [14]. As an initial diagnostic examination, the WHO recently proposed GenXpert for patients with HIV supposed to have tuberculosis or for those who are at risk for rifampicin resistance and/or MDR tuberculosis. GenXpert (MTB/RIF) Ultra is theoretically facilitating, more precise, and sensitive bedside testing that can enhance tuberculosis detection in smear-negative patients, and similar assays are currently under development. Line probe assay (LPA), approved by WHO, is family of DNA strip-based tests for swift recognition of first- and second-line antitubercular agents drug resistance [31]. It can also be used for testing culture isolates along with direct testing of acid-fast bacilli as well as smear-positive and -negative sputum specimens. LPA can determine the frequently identified mutations in resistant strains [14,15].