Introduction Endogenous oxidative stress and environmental factors induce multiple damage in cellular DNA, among them bulky DNA adducts, interstrand DNA cross-links (ICLs), and clustered DNA lesions (including double-strand breaks, DSBs), which are distinguished from singular lesions by their complex characters and structures (Deans and West, 2011; Yang et al., 2017; Mullins et al., 2019; Nickoloff et al., 2020) (Figures 1A,B). Complex DNA damage (CDD) is characterized by two important features: bulky character and the presence of more than one modification of one turn of the DNA helix. Although in general CDD constitutes a relatively minor share of the total DNA damage induced by chemo- and radiotherapy in treated cancer cells, they present daunting obstacles to DNA template scanning processes and if not repaired lead to cell death and gross chromosomal rearrangements. Among complex DNA lesions, ICLs are one of the most cytotoxic and difficult to repair, because they prevent DNA strand separation during DNA replication and transcription. To get insight into the biological roles of CDDs, it is important to comprehend the nature and mechanisms of their formation which often proceeds via interactions of DNA with endogenous reactive metabolites and various exogenous factors. Studies of the cellular defense mechanisms counteracting genotoxic effects of CDD revealed that the removal of complex lesions requires several distinct DNA repair pathways including global genome and transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (GG-NER and TC-NER, respectively), poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)-mediated DNA strand break repair, base excision repair (BER), nucleotide incision repair (NIR), mismatch repair (MMR), non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), homologous recombination (HR), and translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) pathways. In this review, we attempt to enlighten the structural properties, mechanisms of formation of CDD, and role of recently discovered alternative DNA repair mechanisms. Due to the space constraints, the formation and repair of clustered DNA lesions will not be discussed in this review instead; we would recommend several excellent reviews on this topic (Cadet et al., 2012; Georgakilas et al., 2013; Sage and Shikazono, 2017; Mavragani et al., 2019). Figure 1Chemical structures of singular and complex DNA base damage. (A) Singular non-bulky oxidative DNA base lesions. (B) Complex DNA lesions including cisplatin-ICL, mitomycin-ICL, and bulky repair-resistant DNA base lesions. Chemical structures of singular and complex DNA base damage. (A) Singular non-bulky oxidative DNA base lesions. (B) Complex DNA lesions including cisplatin-ICL, mitomycin-ICL, and bulky repair-resistant DNA base lesions.