1. Introduction Microorganisms are offering us many natural compounds used for their therapeutic properties including antibacterial, antifungal, and antitumor agents, amongst many others. The most prolific microbial source of these natural products is the filamentous bacteria that belong to the genus Streptomyces [1,2]. Streptomycetes are Actinobacteria that have a complex multicellular lifestyle [3,4,5,6]. They grow as a branched mycelium consisting of vegetative or substrate hyphae. When nutrients become scarce or upon sensing of physico-chemical stresses, the bacteria enter into a differentiation process. This morphological change starts with the formation of an aerial mycelium emerging from the substrate mycelium and ends with the differentiation of the aerial hyphae into unigenomic spores that have a reproductive and disseminating function. When reproduction is required, an aerial mycelium is formed that feeds on the substrate mycelium, and eventually the aerial hyphae differentiate into long chains of spores. The production of secondary metabolites such as antibiotics is temporally correlated to the onset of morphological differentiation [7,8,9,10]. Why Streptomyces produce so many of these bioactive small molecules, and what the functions of these compounds for their producer, has only recently gained attention [11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21]. Two main conflicting viewpoints have stirred debate within this field, with some hypothesizing that ‘antibiotics’ are only weapons involved in territorial warfare between (micro)organisms, and others suggesting that, at the concentration that they are likely to be found in their natural environments, antibiotics might act as signalling molecules involved in intra- or interspecies communication [11,12,14,15,16,17,18,20,22]. Of course, these possibilities are not mutually exclusive, as one could imagine multiple context-specific functions for a single molecule. In addition, more complex roles are also attributed to antibiotics including to induce membrane damage of the producer to fulfil nutrient and energy needs, especially phosphate sources, for the surviving population [20,23]. Understanding the ecological functions of the ‘parvome’, i.e., the small molecules produced by microorganisms [24,25], remains a challenging task given the range of biological activities reported for these molecules. Most Streptomyces live in environments that are also home to many other bacteria, fungi, and plants [22], and so perhaps it is not surprising that they produce compounds with antibacterial, antifungal, and herbicidal properties. Finding a rationale for certain Streptomyces and other bacterial species to produce molecules that display anti-proliferative activities against cancer cell lines is much more puzzling. Recently, it was shown that anticancer compounds may also form a line of defense against phage infection [26]. We postulate that these specialized metabolites are also involved in controlling cell proliferation for the proper development (growth and differentiation) of the producing organism. Streptomyces and other Actinobacteria produce DNA-damaging antitumor antibiotics such as molecules anthracyclines, bleomycins, enediynes, mitomycins, and prodiginines [27]. These molecules are so toxic that several mechanisms of self-resistance are often required for the survival of the producer, including toxin sequestration, efflux, modification, inactivation, self-sacrifice, and target repair [27]. Amongst this type of compounds, tri-pyrrole prodiginines (PdGs) are also able to disrupt the plasma membrane via a chaotropicity-mediated mode-of-action in addition to DNA cleavage [28,29,30]. Streptorubin B and undecylprodigiosin produced by S. coelicolor [31] are particularly interesting because these molecules remain trapped into the cytoplasm and the membranes of the bacterial filaments and are therefore likely to be necessary for the physiology of the producer rather than being involved in warfare with neighboring microorganisms. Moreover, in contrast to other DNA-damaging antitumor antibiotics [27], the biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) of PdGs does not include genes involved in self-resistance. Why does S. coelicolor internally produce highly toxic compounds without having genes for self-resistance? These two exceptional features, i.e., (i) no secretion and (ii) no resistance genes, prompted us to investigate a possible role in the programmed cell death (PCD) process of the producer. PCD is a hallmark of multicellularity in bacteria, such as in Myxococcus, cyanobacteria and Actinobacteria, as well as in biofilms [6,13,32,33,34,35,36,37]. A study of the cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa showed that the external addition of prodigiosin induced the formation of reactive oxygen species, which induced PCD [38,39]. Consistent with a role in the onset of PCD, the production of PdGs in S. coelicolor perfectly follows in time and space the zone of the culture where filaments were submitted to a first round of PCD [13]. Once produced, PdGs themselves inflict a massive second round of death resulting in an important destruction of essential macromolecules (DNA, RNA, and proteins) [13]. In contrast, a PdG non-producing mutant (strain S. coelicolor ΔredD) accumulates viable biomass and macromolecules confirming the occurrence of a PdG-dependent destructive process of the vegetative mycelium in the wild-type strain at this stage of the life cycle [13]. What is the role of PdGs in the morphological differentiation of S. coelicolor and what is the fate of the mycelium that survived the round of PCD associated with PdG production? In this work we attempted to provide the first evidence to solve these questions by assessing the consequences of deletion, or instead, the addition of multiple copies of the redD transcription activator on the morphological differentiation of S. coelicolor, and by monitoring PdG production in PCD survivors.