Introduction Algae and fungi have coexisted and coevolved for at least 400 million years, as deduced from fossil records showing macroalgae parasitized by fungi [1], as well as lichens [2, 3]. During the course of evolution, terrestrial algae and fungi have formed lichens but some have lost this ability [4]. Tight associations between algae and fungi, in particular in lichens, provide examples of mutualism that has been maintained over hundreds of millions of years up to the present [4]. However, the benefits for the algal partners remain a matter of debate as the mycobiont often gains a fitness advantage at the expense of the photobiont. Furthermore, the mycobiont can control the growth and metabolism of the photobiont, which is referred to as “helotism” [5], a type of “algal slavery” [6] with reference to the master–servant relationship of ancient sparta. Microorganisms are often subject to rapidly changing biotic and abiotic conditions in their natural habitats. To cope with these environmental changes, they often produce natural products that are low molecular mass metabolites [7, 8]. They are often dispensable for growth, produced at a certain stage in the life cycle of the producing organism and can be of pharmaceutical value [7]. In many cases, these natural products are weapons to defend habitats against competing microorganisms. Metagenomic analysis has revealed that lichens are colonized by various other microorganisms and form “microhabitats” themselves [9, 10]. Among the potentially beneficial colonizers, there are streptomycetes equipped with an antibiotic arsenal [11–14]. How this multipartner interaction remains stable through mutualistic exchange and how lichens cope with potentially toxin-producing colonizers is largely unknown. Co-existance of filamentous fungi, streptomycetes and other producers of natural products often triggers the production of these effector chemicals [15]. For instance, Streptomyces rapamycinicus and its closest relative S. iranensis (Supplementary Fig. 1) are capable of eliciting the production of the archetypical lichen metabolites orsellinic acid and lecanoric acid in the fungal partner A. nidulans. However these metabolites do not show activity against S. rapamycinicus, the closest relative to S. iranensis [16–18]. Since A. nidulans interacts with the green alga C. reinhardtii [19] and lichens are colonized by potentially harmful streptomycetes [11, 12, 14], we hypothesized that S. iranensis might interfere with this algal–fungal association. Here, we have found a tripartite interaction of the model green alga C. reinhardtii with the established bipartite A. nidulans-S. iranensis co-culture system [17]. We found that both partners have distinct effects on the alga: (i) the bacterium kills the alga using the natural product azalomycin F, (ii) the alga is protected by fungi resistant against azalomycin F like A. nidulans, and (iii) the presence of A. nidulans increases the growth rate and overall biomass of C. reinhardtii. We show that the algal–fungal association itself is a defense mechanism against toxins.