Introduction Cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide, with 70% of cases occurring in low- and middle-income countries1. Among the 30 essential anticancer drugs categorized by the World Health Organization in 2015, several molecules, including topotecan, irinotecan, vincristine, and vinorelbine, are extracted from plants or derived from plant monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs), such as camptothecin and catharanthine2,3. MIAs are natural products derived from (S)-strictosidine, with a monoterpene moiety derived from secologanin, an iridoid class of monoterpenes, and the indole moiety from tryptamine, a decarboxylation product of the amino acid tryptophan (Supplementary Fig. 1). The monoterpenoid moiety of strictosidine then undergoes extensive modifications catalyzed by various enzymes to form diverse MIAs, which represent over 2500 known metabolites2. Most of our current understanding of MIA biosynthesis is restricted to the vinca alkaloid synthesis pathway elucidated in Catharanthus roseus4–9. Camptothecin, another strictosidine-derived molecule and one of the most potent anticancer MIAs, is the precursor for the commercial synthesis of topotecan and irinotecan, and several other camptothecin derivatives are in clinical trials at different stages10,11. The camptothecin biosynthesis pathway and the mechanisms regulating its production remain unknown, even though it is one of the most promising plant-derived antitumor drugs (Supplementary Fig. 1)11. Difficulties in extraction, the low content per gram dry weight of the producing plant tissues, and lack of sustainable resources have limited the development of camptothecin-derived and other anticancer MIAs, contributing to the unaffordability of cancer treatment for most patients. Ophiorrhiza pumila, a fast-growing herbaceous plant from the Rubiaceae family, has emerged as a model plant for the study of MIA biosynthesis and regulation, and a sustainable source of camptothecin12–14. O. pumila hairy roots have been shown to accumulate high levels of camptothecin, and this plant has served as an experimental model for the understanding of MIA biosynthesis for over a decade3,15,16. Previous studies have found a correlation of camptothecin biosynthesis and accumulation with the conserved mutation of two amino acids in DNA topoisomerase I in camptothecin-producing plants, including species from the Ophiorrhiza genus, that allow the plants to survive camptothecin cytotoxicity14,17. While the basis of natural selection for plant species with resistance against camptothecin is relatively straightforward, how nature simultaneously evolved all the enzymes needed for camptothecin biosynthesis is not yet clear. Understanding MIAs’ evolution and biosynthesis is also essential for building sustainable alternate production platforms to facilitate access to these lifesaving compounds. With an estimated 20 million new cancer cases globally by 2025 and an economic burden estimated at $1.16 trillion in 201018, meeting the increasing demands for camptothecin and other anticancer MIAs has become a daunting challenge and requires immediate attention. A high-quality reference genome for an anticancer MIA-producing plant is the first step toward achieving this goal. In this study, we show the advantage of ordered multitiered scaffolding with assembly validation at each stage to achieve a highly contiguous genome assembly. This strategy allows us to derive a near-finished and experimentally validated reference and phased genome assembly of O. pumila. Our results show the relevance of experimental validation for next-generation plant genome assemblies. Further, we expand the nitrogen-containing metabolome space of Ophiorrhiza by using complete stable isotope labeling and cheminformatics approaches. A combination of comparative genomics approaches suggest the emergence of strictosidine synthase (STR) as a key event in the evolution of strictosidine-derived MIA biosynthesis in plants. Our results suggest that the enzymes involved in the committed step of a specialized metabolite biosynthesis pathway directs evolution and innovation in the plant kingdom. This study, by establishing a high-quality genome and metabolome resource for O. pumila, provides a foundation for yield improvement of valuable anticancer metabolites through synthetic biology and biotechnology.