INTRODUCTION Pantoea species have been recognized as plant pathogens since 1928 (1). These Gram-negative Enterobacteriaceae were originally classified as members of the genus Erwinia but were subsequently moved to Pantoea based on DNA hybridization experiments (2). Although many Pantoea species are benign or beneficial plant mutualists, strains of P. ananatis are consistently associated with harmful crop and forest infestations (3–7). Since 1983, the known hosts of P. ananatis have increased to 8 plant species in 11 countries, including important crops such as rice, corn, onions, melon, and pineapple (8). Upon plant infection, these bacteria cause internal rotting, dieback, and blight, resulting in severe economic losses. In addition to primary infection in the field, significant postharvest losses, as observed in onion center rot, have also been reported (9). Moreover, this plant pathogen can also infect humans and insects, which serve as vectors for plant infection (10–12). Thus, there is a compelling need to understand P. ananatis pathogenesis to help address its epidemic spread among essential food crops. Despite the economic and food safety implications of P. ananatis infection, the mechanisms of plant pathogenicity have only recently been investigated. Comparative genomic analyses revealed substantial diversity between P. ananatis strains, which may account for their ability to colonize and thrive in so many different hosts (13, 14). The pathogenicity determinants encoded by diverse P. ananatis genomes include quorum sensing systems, type VI secretion systems, motility factors, cell wall-degrading enzymes, and thiosulfinate resistance alleles (15–17). In 2019, a novel pathogenicity determinant for onion center rot was revealed by comparison of the genomic sequences of two pathogenic and two nonpathogenic P. ananatis strains (18). This approach identified a genomic island designated “HiVir,” which was subsequently shown to be present in 14 pathogenic strains and absent in 16 nonpathogenic strains using a PCR-based screen. The HiVir locus encodes an 11-gene operon (here, designated hvr) that was suggested to encode a biosynthetic pathway for an unknown phosphonic acid natural product based on the presence of a putative pepM gene. This gene encodes the enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) phosphonomutase, which catalyzes the first step in all characterized phosphonate biosynthetic pathways and which has been extensively used as a genetic marker for the ability to produce phosphonic acid metabolites (19, 20). Deletion of pepM in P. ananatis OC5a resulted in a strain with severely attenuated pathogenicity in Allium cepa (onion), demonstrating a required role for the hvr operon in onion center rot. Based on this finding, Asselin et al. (18) suggested that a small molecule phosphonate is involved in plant disease caused by P. ananatis. Phosphonates, defined by the presence of chemically stable carbon-phosphorus bonds, are an underdeveloped class of bioactive molecules with significant applications in both medicine and agriculture. The bioactivity of these molecules results from their structural similarity to phosphate esters and carboxylic acids, which allows them to bind enzymes that act on analogous substrates, thus inhibiting enzyme activity. A prominent example is the manmade herbicide glyphosate, which was first synthesized by chemists in the 1950s. The phytotoxicity of glyphosate is due to its inhibition of 5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate (EPSP) synthase, a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of aromatic amino acids in plants (21). Significantly, enzyme inhibition by individual phosphonates is quite specific and typically confined to enzymes that act on chemically homologous substrates. Accordingly, a phosphonate can be toxic to one group of organisms while remaining innocuous to another. Thus, depending on the organism in which the target enzyme is found, phosphonates find applications as specific antibacterial, antifungal, antiparasital, and herbicidal compounds (22–24). Given the ubiquitous occurrence of phosphate esters and carboxylic acids in metabolism, the range of potential biological targets for phosphonate inhibitors is vast. Indeed, as demonstrated by the number of organisms known to produce bioactive phosphonates, nature has often capitalized on this metabolic Achilles’ heel. Examples include phosphinothricin tripeptide and fosmidomycin, produced by members of the genus Streptomyces, which have potent herbicidal and antimicrobial activity due to their inhibition of the essential enzymes glutamate synthase and deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate reductoisomerase, respectively (25–27). Nature also makes use of the fact that the C-P bond is highly stable and resistant to both chemical and enzymatic degradation. Accordingly, many organisms replace labile biomolecules such as phospholipids and phosphate ester-modified exopolysaccharides with analogous phosphonates (28, 29). Considering their useful biological properties, it is not surprising that biosynthesis of phosphonate compounds is common among microbes. Based on the presence of pepM in sequenced genomes and metagenomes, ca. 5% of all bacteria possess the capacity for phosphonate biosynthesis (30). Biosynthetic gene clusters that include pepM are known to direct the biosynthesis of phosphonolipids, phosphonoglycans, and a wide variety of small-molecule secondary metabolites (22). Like the streptomycete-derived natural products described above, many of these small-molecule phosphonates are bioactive. Although considerable progress has been made in understanding the bioactivity and biosynthesis of small-molecule phosphonates, only a fraction of the observed pepM-encoding gene clusters have been characterized. Thus, the extent of phosphonate chemical diversity in nature has yet to be established. Consistent with the idea that phosphonate biosynthesis is common in nature, it has also been observed that about 30% of sequenced bacterial genomes contain genes for phosphonate catabolism, which allows their use as sources of phosphorus, carbon or nitrogen (31–33). Genes encoding the carbon-phosphorus (C-P) lyase system, which catalyzes a multistep phosphonate degradation pathway with broad substrate specificity, are particularly common in bacteria (33). Other examples include the enzyme phosphonatase, which is specific for aminoethylphosphonate, and a recently characterized oxidative pathway for use of hydroxymethylphosphonate (34, 35). Although the indirect evidence for the involvement of a bioactive phosphonate in P. ananatis pathogenesis is strong, this has yet to be established. Here, we show that the hvr operon indeed encodes enzymes responsible for production of a small-molecule phosphonate, which we show to be 2-[hydroxy(phosphono)methyl]maleate. The purified molecule, which we have designated pantaphos, has significant herbicidal activity and is able to produce the characteristic lesions of onion center rot in the absence of P. ananatis. Accordingly, this novel phosphonate natural product is both necessary and sufficient for onion rot pathogenesis. In addition, pathogenicity is enhanced in strains lacking phosphonate catabolism, suggesting that endogenous catabolism of pantaphos attenuates virulence.