Introduction To combat the worldwide rise of antibiotic resistance, understanding the resistance mechanism at the molecular level is paramount, which is obligatory to discover various antibiotics or directedly design more effective analogs1–6. Many antibiotics contain hypersensitive and highly reactive pharmacophore, which is the basis for displaying biological activity as warhead. As a result, the producing-organisms have to co-evolve an effective self-protection scheme with the biosynthetic capability dealing with the dangerous warhead to avoid injuring themselves. Among the known self-resistance strategies, enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis is widely employed by bacteria to destroy the reactive pharmacophore in either antibiotic-resistant strain of pathogenic bacteria or antibiotic-producers. One of the well-known examples is β-lactamase-mediated hydrolytic deactivating of β-lactam antibiotics, which not only widely spread in the pathogenic and environmental microbiome but also led to the development of β-lactamase inhibitors as next generation of drugs7,8. Recently, different family of cyclopropane hydrolases were identified to catalyze hydrolysis of cyclopropane warhead, conferring self-resistance involved in yatakemycin (YTM)/CC-1065 and colibactin biosynthesis9,10. Therefore, continuous efforts on elucidation for different kinds of self-resistance mechanisms based on natural product biosynthesis will enrich our knowledge about enzyme-catalyzed inactivation of antibiotics, which may include the other enzyme-reactions acting on the pharmacophore beyond hydrolysis. Tetrahydroisoquinoline (THIQ) antibiotics, with a special THIQ framework, have attracted continuous studies due to the complex polycyclic structures and excellent biological activities against bacteria and tumor cells11–13. This family of natural products includes more than 60 members exemplified by naphthyridinomycin (NDM, 1), saframycin S (SFM-S, 5), ecteinascidin 743 (ET-743, 7), lemonomycin (LMM, 9) (Fig. 1a), and so on, in which ET-743 has been approved as an anticancer drug14. As a family of DNA damaging genotoxins, THIQ antibiotics exhibit remarkably potent DNA alkylating activity through the departure of hydroxy group in hemiaminal moiety followed by an attack of N-2 of guanine in GC-rich region (Fig. 1b)11. Thereby the hemiaminal pharmacophore serves as a warhead for antibiotic and antitumor potential, which calls effective resistance mechanism to counter its toxicity by the producing microbes.Fig. 1Members of THIQ antibiotics, biosynthesis, and activation of NDM.a Chemical structures of typical THIQ antibiotics. b Proposed mechanism of THIQ antibiotic-mediated DNA alkylation. c Brief summary of NDM biosynthetic pathway featuring with intracellular pharmacophore quenching and extracellular reactivation. Fig. 1Members of THIQ antibiotics, biosynthesis, and activation of NDM.a Chemical structures of typical THIQ antibiotics. b Proposed mechanism of THIQ antibiotic-mediated DNA alkylation. c Brief summary of NDM biosynthetic pathway featuring with intracellular pharmacophore quenching and extracellular reactivation. Members of THIQ antibiotics, biosynthesis, and activation of NDM. a Chemical structures of typical THIQ antibiotics. b Proposed mechanism of THIQ antibiotic-mediated DNA alkylation. c Brief summary of NDM biosynthetic pathway featuring with intracellular pharmacophore quenching and extracellular reactivation. In previous biosynthetic studies of NDM15,16, we found an extracellularly oxidative activation and conditionally over-oxidative inactivation of an intermediate 7H-NDM (2) by a secreted enzyme, NapU, controlling the concentration of NDM around cells for self-resistance, and prodrug 12 was detected during biosynthetic process (Fig. 1c)17. This raises an open question: how the inactivated intermediate 12 is generated in cytoplasm and which enzyme is responsible for inactivating the hemiaminal pharmacophore (Fig. 1c)? Here, we solved these mysteries by elucidating an intracellularly reductive inactivation of NDM catalyzed by NapW and homW, which belong to short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) family encoded by genes napW within biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) and homW outside BGC, respectively. We further demonstrated that expression of the genes endows bacteria with NDM-resistance and identified the key residue, Asp165, involved in NapW-catalytic reduction based on structural analysis. In this work, we found that similar self-resistance is involved in the biosynthesis of SFM; and this family of SDRs from other microorganisms could also recognize NDM and other three THIQ compounds to reductively inactivate the hemiaminal warhead. The substrate promiscuity of SDR proteins thereby not only provides the detoxification protection in cytoplasm during the biosynthetic pathway and general immunity toward THIQ antibiotics, but also expands the known enzymatic reactions for pharmacophore modification beyond hydrolysis.