Introduction Polyketides are a large family of structurally diverse natural products with varied biological and pharmacological activities including antibacterial, antitumor, and immunosuppressant1,2. A great number of polyketides are constructed by giant modular polyketides synthases (PKSs) with multifunctional domains. After initiated by the loading module, the polyketide chain will be elongated iteratively by each extension module in a manner analogous to fatty acid biosynthesis. The acyltransferase (AT) domain loads a specific extender unit to acyl carrier protein (ACP) and the ketosynthase (KS) domain performs a two-carbon addition to ACP-tethered acyl-thioesters via head-to-tail Claisen condensation. The newly synthesized β-ketothioester intermediates could be modified by additional domains (e.g., ketoreductase (KR), dehydratase (DH), enoyl reductase (ER), and methyltransferase (MT)) in the extension module before they are released by an offloading module which usually contains a thioesterase (TE) or a reductase (R) domain3–5. Specifically, a large family of modular PKSs is trans-AT PKS, which does not have an AT domain in each extension module as cis-AT PKS but shares a standalone AT by multiple extension modules6–8. In principle, the polyketide core structures are consistent with the domain organizations of module PKSs, which was called the co-linearity rule9. Notably, trans-AT PKS frequently deviates from this rule owing to the presence of modules with aberrant domain architecture or no apparent function. The phylogeny and substrate specificity of their KS domains can be applied for the prediction of product structures of trans-AT PKS10,11. The vast structural diversity of polyketides is introduced by different combinations of initiation, extension, and termination steps as well as versatile tailoring processes. For the initiation process, malonyl-coenzyme A (CoA) is a frequently used starter unit, which is usually decarboxylated to an acetyl-thioester to begin the extension process. Consequently, most polyketides constructed in this way have a terminal methyl group unless it is modified by tailoring enzymes12–14. Aurantinins (ARTs) are a group of four antibiotics isolated from Bacillus aurantinus strain KM-214 and Bacillus subtilis fmb6015–18 all sharing a unique 6/7/8/5-fused tetracyclic ring system and a triene side chain with an unusual carboxyl terminus, but differing in glycosylation and methylation patterns (Fig. 1a). Of the four known compounds, ART B is the major product and possesses a special 3′-keto-β-sugar attached to its C-17 hydroxyl group. ARTs exhibit broad activity against Gram-positive bacteria including multidrug-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and anaerobic bacteria like Clostridium sporogenes, and they kill bacteria by disrupting the cell wall membrane18. Biosynthetic insight from previous feeding experiments with isotope-labeled precursors suggested that the ART B aglycone is assembled from two unusual polyketide chains: (i) a short chain containing an uncommon tail-to-tail condensation of two acetate units (C-24 to C-27); (ii) a long dicarboxylic acid chain with one of the two carboxyl groups (C-1 carboxyl of ART) derived from the C-1 of an acetate unit (Fig. 1a)17. However, without knowledge of the ART biosynthetic gene cluster it remains unclear how the two ART polyketide chains are assembled and undergo the unusual cyclization and glycosylation processes.Fig. 1Structures and the biosynthetic gene cluster of ARTs.a Structures of ART A-D. The isotope labeling pattern of the ART B aglycone is shown as two separate polyketide chains. The C-1 carbon (marked with a light blue star) was previously proposed to originate from the C-1 of acetate17; in this study, we propose it originates from the free carboxyl end of the malonyl starter unit. b Genetic organization of the art gene cluster. c HPLC profiles of B. subtilis fmb60 wild-type and mutant strains. B. subtilis Δart28/art28 and Δart28/Bc-bioC are two complementation strains of the art28 in-frame deletion mutant B. subtilis Δart28. Fig. 1Structures and the biosynthetic gene cluster of ARTs.a Structures of ART A-D. The isotope labeling pattern of the ART B aglycone is shown as two separate polyketide chains. The C-1 carbon (marked with a light blue star) was previously proposed to originate from the C-1 of acetate17; in this study, we propose it originates from the free carboxyl end of the malonyl starter unit. b Genetic organization of the art gene cluster. c HPLC profiles of B. subtilis fmb60 wild-type and mutant strains. B. subtilis Δart28/art28 and Δart28/Bc-bioC are two complementation strains of the art28 in-frame deletion mutant B. subtilis Δart28. Structures and the biosynthetic gene cluster of ARTs. a Structures of ART A-D. The isotope labeling pattern of the ART B aglycone is shown as two separate polyketide chains. The C-1 carbon (marked with a light blue star) was previously proposed to originate from the C-1 of acetate17; in this study, we propose it originates from the free carboxyl end of the malonyl starter unit. b Genetic organization of the art gene cluster. c HPLC profiles of B. subtilis fmb60 wild-type and mutant strains. B. subtilis Δart28/art28 and Δart28/Bc-bioC are two complementation strains of the art28 in-frame deletion mutant B. subtilis Δart28. In this study, we identified the art gene cluster in B. subtilis fmb60 and proposed the ART biosynthetic pathway by dissecting C-methyl incorporation patterns. We were particularly intrigued by the presence of a methyltransferase (MT) gene art28 that is indispensable for ART biosynthesis but apparently ‘redundant’ with respect to the known C-methyl incorporations; i.e., the other methyltransferases could account for all SAM-dependent methylations on the ART scaffold. Characterization of Art28 as a malonyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP) O-MT revealed an alternative initiation strategy for polyketide biosynthesis involving malonyl group transfer to ACPArt10 followed by on-line methyl esterification to trigger polyketide chain extension. This methyl ester ‘protecting group’ is retained throughout ART biosynthesis and is hydrolyzed by a membrane protein, Art9, to expose the free carboxyl terminus at the final step. The methyl ester bond formation and cleavage process catalyzed by Art28 and Art9 are reminiscent of carboxyl esterification and deprotection strategies frequently used in chemical synthesis. Moreover, the inactive biosynthetic intermediate ART 9B is converted to the active antibiotic ART B via Art9-catalyzed hydrolysis of the methyl ester, indicating that the terminal methyl ester can also protect the ART producers from toxic intermediates. In silico and in vitro analyses of the Art28-like O-MTs revealed that this on-line methyl esterification initiation strategy for polyketide biosynthesis is distributed in different bacteria from four phyla.