Introduction Fitting evolutionary models to molecular sequences in a phylogenetic context can help piece together the key steps in adaptive evolution and uncover the relative contributions of selection and other evolutionary mechanisms to adaptive phenotypic evolution (Smith et al. 2020). Comparative studies of convergence, or the repeated evolution of characters within different lineages undergoing the same environmental challenges, provide powerful evidence of both adaptation and connections between genetic and phenotypic change (Losos 2011). Investigations into the molecular basis of convergence have revealed multiple occurrences of parallelism, where different lineages have evolved changes within the same proteins, and occasionally at the same amino acid sites, in response to shared selective pressures, such as insects that have evolved the ability to feed on toxic plants (Zhen et al. 2012) and populations of ducks and humans living at high elevations (Graham and McCracken 2019). Such patterns support important roles for both positive selection and constraint in the origin of complex adaptations (reviewed by Storz 2016). Resistance to tetrodotoxin (TTX), a potent neurotoxin, has evolved convergently in several distantly related organisms, including pufferfish, snakes, and newts (reviewed by Soong and Venkatesh 2006; Toledo et al. 2016), and therefore offers an ideal system to investigate the molecular basis of adaptive evolution (Arbuckle et al. 2017). The genetic basis of TTX resistance, which is well established in tetrodotoxic puffer fish (Jost et al. 2008) and in snakes that consume TTX-bearing prey (Geffeney et al. 2002; Feldman et al. 2012; McGlothlin et al. 2014, 2016), involves amino acid substitutions in the toxin’s target, voltage-gated sodium channels (Nav). Although Nav are commonly abbreviated as SCNA genes and Nav proteins, hereafter, we simplify this nomenclature by abbreviating both as Nav. Nav channels are responsible for the initiation and propagation of action potentials in excitable cells and are composed of four domains (DI–DIV), each comprising six transmembrane helices and a pore-loop region (the P-loop; Fux et al. 2018). The four P-loops, one in each domain, form a pore within the membranes of excitable cells to selectively allow sodium ions to cross when the channel is open. TTX exerts its effects by binding to the P-loops of sensitive channels and preventing sodium entry into cells, thus blocking action potentials. Gene duplication events have resulted in six Nav paralogs, each with tissue-specific expression, that are shared across all tetrapods (table 1), with additional lineage-specific duplications occurring in amniotes (Widmark et al. 2011; Zakon 2012). Because the structure of these paralogs is highly conserved, each has the potential to be blocked by TTX if it lacks resistance-conferring substitutions. Nomenclature for Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel Genes. Gene Name Protein Name Tissue Expressiona. SCN1A NaV1.1 Brain. SCN2A NaV1.2 Brain. SCN3A NaV1.3 Brain. SCN4A NaV1.4 Muscle. SCN5A NaV1.5 Heart. SCN8A NaV1.6 Brain/peripheral nervous system. Patterns of tissue expression are inferred from studies of gene orthologs in mammals (reviewed in Yu and Catterall [2003]). Species that possess or consume TTX must either have a full complement of resistant paralogs or otherwise shield sodium channels from contact with the toxin. Indeed, resistant substitutions are present in all eight of the Nav genes within the genomes of multiple species of TTX-bearing pufferfish (from the family Tetraodontidae; Jost et al. 2008) and in six of the nine Nav genes in Thamnophis sirtalis snakes that consume TTX-bearing Taricha newts (McGlothlin et al. 2014; Perry et al. 2018). The three brain channels Nav1.1, Nav1.2, and Nav1.3 of snakes remain TTX sensitive, but presumably are protected from TTX by the blood-brain barrier (McGlothlin et al. 2014). In snakes, the evolution of extreme TTX resistance appears to follow a predictable, stepwise substitution pattern across TTX-exposed members of the Nav gene family, with substitutions in heart and peripheral nerve channels preceding those in the muscle channel gene, Nav1.4, which evolves resistance only in snakes locked in coevolutionary arms races with highly tetrodotoxic amphibian prey (Feldman et al. 2012; McGlothlin et al. 2016; Perry et al. 2018). Less is known about the evolutionary history of TTX resistance in Taricha newts, the highly toxic coevolutionary partner of Thamnophis (Brodie and Brodie 1990; Brodie et al. 2002; Williams et al. 2010; Hague et al. 2020). The extreme toxicity of Taricha, which has been elaborated by the ongoing coevolutionary arms race with garter snakes, builds upon lower levels of toxicity that evolved ∼30 Ma within “modern” newts (tribe Molgini; Hanifin and Gilly 2015; divergence date estimated by Hime et al. 2021). The evolution of toxicity necessitates the evolution of toxin autoresistance so that a prey species is not incapacitated by its own antipredator defense (Jost et al. 2008; Toledo et al. 2016; Tarvin et al. 2017; Márquez et al. 2019). Understanding the timing and details of this autoresistance can shed light on the genetic processes underlying the predator-prey arms race. Hanifin and Gilly (2015) compared the sequences of one sodium channel gene, the muscle paralog Nav1.4, across several salamander species and identified substitutions in the P-loops of DIII and DIV that provide extreme TTX resistance to the muscles of TTX-bearing newts. Importantly, the sister group of these toxic newts had substitutions in the same gene providing more moderate resistance, indicating that the evolution of autoresistance in a common ancestor paved the way for the evolution of extreme toxicity. More recently, Vaelli et al. (2020) used transcriptome sequencing to characterize the genetic basis of physiological resistance to TTX in Taricha granulosa and identified substitutions within TTX-binding regions in the other five Nav paralogs, many of which occur within the P-loop of DI. However, because it is unknown whether other salamander species possess TTX resistance in these paralogs, the order and timing of the evolutionary events leading to autoresistance in toxic newts are still unknown. Furthermore, no studies to date have applied evolutionary models to test for the relative importance of mechanisms such as positive selection, relaxed constraint, and interlocus gene conversion in the evolution of newt TTX resistance. Here, we trace the evolutionary history of the entire Nav gene family across the salamander phylogeny to show the order in which resistant substitutions appeared. Using published genome sequences and newly generated sequence data, we characterize the genomic structure of Nav genes in newts and their relatives, inferring the timing of resistant substitutions leading to the extreme TTX resistance observed across all Nav paralogs in Taricha newts (Vaelli et al. 2020). We estimate rates of synonymous and nonsynonymous substitution to identify positive selection. In addition, we assess the potential of nonallelic gene conversion, a process by which sequence is copied from one paralog to another (Chen et al. 2007), to act as a source of adaptive variation. Combining these data provides insight into the evolutionary mechanisms underlying the origin of a uniquely potent chemical defense.