1. Introduction The number of bacterial strains resistant to antibiotics has increased radically, making antimicrobial resistance (AMR) a major global health emergency of the 21st century [1,2]. Currently, AMR infections are responsible for at least 700,000 deaths each year worldwide (https://www.who.int/news/item/29-04-2019-new-report-calls-for-urgent-action-to-avert-antimicrobial-resistance-crisis, accessed on 25 May 2021). If no action is taken, this figure could increase up to 10 million by the year 2050, with a global financial burden of USD 100 trillion [2]. AMR is so alarming that the World Health Organization (WHO) just stated that combating AMR is one of the top 10 global health issues to track in 2021 by identifying its causes, routes of transmission, and encouraging the development of new antimicrobials (https://www.who.int/news-room/spotlight/10-global-health-issues-to-track-in-2021, accessed on 25 May 2021). Several factors contribute to the AMR crisis. The main drivers include antibiotics misuse and overuse by the general population and in food-producing animals, as well as their incorrect and indiscriminate administration by healthcare professionals [3,4]. As a consequence of these malpractices, resistance to the so-called “last-resort” antibiotics is not an emerging problem anymore, but a reality [5,6]. Hence, there is a crucial need for the development of new antimicrobials, which, if not pursued, in the worst-case scenario, could result in even common procedures, such as dental treatments, becoming life threatening. For these reasons, a number of international health agencies (e.g., European Medicines Agency, Food and Drug Administration, World Health Organization, European Center for Disease prevention and Control) support the development of new antimicrobials, treatments, and preventive approaches [7]. Alternatives, such as bacteriophages, probiotics, lysins, antimicrobial peptides, antibodies, and vaccines, have been investigated to reduce the use of antibiotics [8]. An emerging area of interest is the development of very-narrow-spectrum or species-specific antimicrobials, where the goal is to target only the microbe(s) that are actually causing infection, also limiting the selection for resistance and dysbiosis commonly induced in the coexisting beneficial microbiota by broad-spectrum antimicrobials [9]. Such an approach can include the use of bacteriocins, which are a subset of the antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) that are produced by bacteria [10]. They are proteins or peptides, usually ribosomally synthesized, displaying antimicrobial activity towards strains of the same or other bacterial species, with an activity that is influenced by different environmental factors, such as temperature and pH, among others [11,12]. While some bacteriocins only exhibit antimicrobial activity against bacteria of the same species or against close phylogenetic groups, designated as narrow-spectrum bacteriocins, others are active against a variety of genera and, thus, display a broad antimicrobial activity. In this manner, bacteriocins are extremely diverse in structure, being encoded by complex and variable gene clusters, which go through rapid evolution and recurrent horizontal transfer, namely by plasmids [13]. These bacteriocin gene clusters usually encode the bacteriocin itself, but also biosynthetic enzymes, export and immunity mechanisms, and even quorum sensing bacteriocin production regulators. Bacteriocin producers usually protect themselves through self-immunity proteins and/or by efflux transporters [13]. This protection is generally restricted to the bacteriocin itself or very closely related ones. Even though bacteriocins are being explored for diverse medical approaches (in veterinary medical products; prevention of biofilm formation in medical device surfaces, such as urinary catheters; anti-inflammatory or anticancer substances) [14,15,16], their application is mostly associated with their antimicrobial activity [10]. The mechanisms behind their activity, which are not fully understood, are diverse and include the disruption of the cell membranes by pore formation (e.g., enterocin AS-48), and the impairment of cell wall synthesis (e.g., nisin) or of nucleic acid replication and translation (e.g., microcin B17) [13]. In contrast with antibiotics, which, to different extents, decrease bacterial diversity, generating opportunities for the overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria, and can create conditions for the development of antibiotic resistance, the action of bacteriocins can lead to different outcomes by promoting or preventing invasion by a new bacterial strain: (a) they may be an advantage to an invasive bacterial strain, allowing it to clear the resident community of bacteriocin-sensitive bacteria; (b) if produced by the resident community, they can act as a shield, preventing the colonization by a bacteriocin-susceptible invader (colonization resistance), although susceptible bacteria are not necessarily eradicated from a specific niche if they are spatially segregated from bacteriocin producers; and (c) bacteriocins can act as signaling peptides/quorum-sensing molecules in the complex gut network [13,17]. Clearly, bacteriocin production is a means to outcompete with other bacteria in mixed communities sharing limited nutrients, space, or adhesion sites to avoid clearance [13]. Moreover, when a bacteriocin is able to kill the competitive bacteria by lysis, it promotes the release of intracellular components, used as essential nutrients, as well as DNA that can be acquired by transformation events contributing to genomic diversity [13]. The fitness of a certain bacterial strain that is competing with bacteriocin-susceptible bacteria can be shaped by gain, loss, or diversification of bacteriocin genes. Nevertheless, a bacteriocin only generates a considerable fitness benefit while inhibiting relevant competitors but avoiding damage to dependent mutualists (for example, providing common nutrients) if the greater competitors are not able to develop resistance and if the fitness benefit is higher than the production metabolic cost [13]. This is a delicate balance, probably affected by yet unknown factors, between antagonistic and mutualistic strains shaping the human microbiome. The knowledge about the role of bacteriocins in this complex network is still in its infancy, even with current metagenomic approaches, as these may miss spatial distribution of strains within a community [13]. Bacteriocins are predominantly produced by bacteria from the Firmicutes phylum, in particular, the lactic acid bacteria (LAB) group of bacteria. Among this group, Enterococcus spp. are well known as one of the greatest bacteriocin producers, both in number of isolates and diversity of enterocins. They are part of our intestinal microbiota and often accumulate multiple adaptive features to diverse environmental conditions and hosts [18]. It was suggested that bacteriocin production ensures niche competition of enterococci within the gut complex microbial network, namely against particular pathogens [18]. However, enterococci, mainly the clinically relevant multidrug-resistant Enterococcus faecium and Enterococcus faecalis, can also be associated with life-threatening infections [19]. Indeed, vancomycin-resistant E. faecium (VREfm) stands as one of the most common causes of hard-to-treat hospital infections and, due to lack of therapeutic options, is recognized by WHO as a priority pathogen urgently requiring new antimicrobials [20], with the use of next-generation probiotics derived from the gut microbiota and bacteriocins as alternatives proposed [21]. Within this context, enterococci can themselves be included in the list of probiotics with the selectivity of their enterocins being a topic of interest to be better addressed. The bacteriocin sensitivity of a given strain can depend on the presence of immunity genes related to its own bacteriocin production (same operon), the presence of extra immunity genes, and other general strain features, such as the membrane composition or the physicochemical properties of the peptide [22]. This review aims to document the current standpoint about the dual role of Enterococcus spp. within the bacteriocin complex context, from important producers to targets that need to be controlled, during infection and colonization scenarios. Classification of enterocins and their spectrum activity, the challenges of using bacteriocins in the fight against VRE and MDR infections in general, alongside the crucial role that enterocins may have in the expansion of enterococcal populations and their mobile genetic elements are here discussed.