INTRODUCTION Trichoderma (Hypocreales, Ascomycota) species are highly successful colonizers of the rhizosphere (as mycoparasites or versatile symbionts) or wherever decaying plant material is available. They are easy to culture, grow rapidly, and often outgrow or even attach to other microbes encountered in their natural habitats. Although some Trichoderma species are of clinical significance, many more are beneficial to humans and in natural processes. For example, the Trichoderma reesei QM6a wild isolate and its cellulase-producing mutants are widely used for commercial production of enzymes that degrade plant cell walls or to generate therapeutic proteins (1–3). Several Trichoderma spp. are also used in agriculture as biocontrol agents (or biopesticides) against plant pathogens or as plant-growth-promoting biofertilizers, including T. asperellum, T. atroviride, T. koningi, T. harzianum, T. rossicum, and T. virens. Trichoderma spp. also have long been model organisms for studying molecular mechanisms underlying industrial enzyme production, secondary metabolite (SM) biosynthesis, effector-like proteins, mycoparasitism, fungal-plant pathogen interactions and asexual sporulation (conidiation) in filamentous fungi (1–16). Recently, T. reesei has become an important emerging model filamentous fungus for studying ascomycete mating, meiosis, postmeiotic mitosis and repeat-induced point (RIP) mutation (17–27). RIP is a fungus-specific genome-level defense mechanism against mobile elements or transposons. RIP occurs premeiotically and targets duplicated sequences and causes frequent conversion of C:G base pairs to T:A within such duplicated sequences (28–30). About 3 decades ago, the Trichoderma genus was divided into five taxonomic sections: Hypocreanum, Longibrachiatum, Pachybasium, Saturnisporum, and Trichoderma (31). Thanks to the rapid development of next-generation sequencing (NGS) and genome-wide annotation technology, researchers have gained more insights into the genomes of several Trichoderma species, including plant-cell-wall degradation enzymes, effector-like proteins and genes putatively involved in the biosynthesis of SMs (2, 3, 10, 32–37). Because the lengths of NGS reads are too short to exclude unidentified nucleotides and assembly errors, further validation is required before these NGS-based genome sequences and resulting annotation data sets can be used systematically. In a worst-case scenario, false-positive assemblies can result in incorrect assignments of gene gain or loss. NGS-based genome sequences also cannot reveal accurate information about genome synteny, diversity, or evolution (21, 38). To obtain highly accurate and chromosome-level reference genomes to explore important biological questions, we previously applied third-generation sequencing (TGS) technology and the “Funannotate” gene-prediction tool to determine and annotate the nearly complete genome sequences of three T. reesei wild isolates, i.e., QM6a, CBS999.97(MAT1-1) and CBS999.97(MAT1-2) (21, 26, 27). Here, we further determined and annotated the nearly complete genome sequences of four Trichoderma biocontrol agents, Trichoderma virens Gv29-8 and FT-333, Trichoderma asperellum FT-101 and Trichoderma atroviride P1 (https://github.com/tfwangasimb/Trichoderma-biocontrol/releases; supplemental information [SI], Table S1). Hereafter, CBS999.97(MAT1-1) and CBS999.97(MAT1-2) and the four biocontrol agents are referred to as CBS1-1, CBS1-2, Gv29-8, FT-333, FT-101, and P1, respectively. We demonstrate in this study that these highest-quality genome resources represent powerful tools for comparative multiomics analyses of these economically important Trichoderma spp.