1. Introduction The science of antibiotics was formed in the twentieth century. About a hundred years ago, Alexander Fleming described the suppression of bacterial growth in an agar medium under the action of a certain substance released into the environment by a fungus colony growing nearby. This fungus was Penicillium chrysogenum, and the first discovered antibiotic was called penicillin. In the 1940s, an active search for natural antimicrobial compounds among representatives of various groups of organisms began. In 1952, Zelman Waxman introduced the term “antibiotics”. By the 1960s, all the major groups of currently known antibiotics had been discovered. Unlike the previous half-century period, during which all the main classes of antibiotics were described, in the twenty-first century the effectiveness of the search for new natural antibiotics has significantly decreased. An additional problem was the emergence of antibiotic-resistant microorganisms. The emergence of antibiotic resistance was a natural biological response to antimicrobial drug use, which created selective pressure that promoted the selection, survival and reproduction of microorganism-resistant strains. The spread of antibiotic-resistant microorganisms reduces the effectiveness of prevention and treatment of infectious and parasitic diseases in humans, animals and plants, leads to an increase in the severity and duration of these diseases, an increase in mortality among the population, and the death of animals and plants. The decline in the effectiveness of existing clinically important antibiotics has motivated researchers to search for new molecules with antimicrobial properties to overcome antimicrobial resistance. The phylum Actinobacteria represents one of the most diverse groups of microorganisms recognized within the domain Bacteria. Among the phylum Actinobacteria, the genus Streptomyces is the source of 70–80% of all secondary metabolites; in addition, the important producers of antibiotics are the Amycolatopsis, Actinoplanes, Micromonospora and Saccharopolyspora genera [1]. In our review we focus on antibiotics produced by genus Amycolatopsis, including the history of their discovery, the emergence of resistance, and the current state of the new drug discovery problem.