Introduction Mycobacterium abscessus is a nontuberculous mycobacterium that commonly causes chronic lung disease, especially among patients with cystic fibrosis [1]. Treatment of pulmonary exacerbation relies on a regimen of intravenous amikacin (AMK), tigecycline, and imipenem plus an oral macrolide if the isolate is susceptible to macrolides [2,3]. Despite guideline-based treatment, combination therapy typically results in cure rates of 50% or less due to the bacterium being intrinsically resistant to many antibiotic classes [4,5]. Unfortunately, the M. abscessus drug-development pipeline is limited to a handful of repurposed drugs (clofazimine, rifabutin, and bedaquiline) [6]. Lately, antibiotics that have shown activity in pre-clinical studies include the oxazolidinones (LCB01-0371 [7] and tedizolid [8]) that target the 50S ribosomal subunit and PIPD1/indol-2-carboxamides that target the mycolic acid transporter MmpL3 [9,10]. Recently, aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) became targets of interest for drug discovery when benzoxaboroles were identified as novel boron-based pharmacophores [11,12]. aaRSs are enzymes that aminoacylate tRNAs with their cognate amino acids. All aaRSs have an aminoacylation domain while some are bifunctional and contain an editing domain. The aminoacylation domain forms an aminoacyl adenylate through condensation of the amino acid with ATP, and then transfers the aminoacyl moiety to the 3’ terminal adenosine of the tRNA acceptor stem. Some aaRSs, however, have evolved an editing domain to ensure the correct amino acid is ligated to its tRNA [13,14]. This domain is critical for aaRSs that must distinguish their cognate amino acid from structurally similar amino acids like branched-chain amino acids. Leucyl-tRNA synthetases (LeuRSs) are examples of aaRSs that rely on their editing domains to limit misaminoacylation of tRNA with near-cognate amino acids and maintain the fidelity of the genetic code. Herein, we identified epetraborole (EPT) from the Medicines for Malaria Venture (MMV) Open pandemic response box as a LeuRS inhibitor in M. abscessus with nanomolar activity in vitro and activity in zebrafish embryos and NOD.SCID mice. Interestingly, EPT was more active against M. abscessus than M. tuberculosis, and this observation was not supported by structural differences in the crystal structures of the LeuRS editing domain of M. abscessus and M. tuberculosis bound to EPT. Furthermore, we highlighted the utility of norvaline to target LeuRS editing deficient escape mutants and suppress resistance in vitro by misincorporation of norvaline in place of leucine residues resulting in disrupted protein folding. Importantly, we showed that EPT and norvaline combination has improved efficacy over EPT monotherapy in a murine model of M. abscessus infection. These data support the potential of the benzoxaborole scaffold in the antimycobacterial drug pipeline and suggest that its activity can be potentiated by supplementation with norvaline or a norvaline derivative.