Introduction Aquaculture is one of the most dynamic sectors in the global food system and has made significant contributions to the production of protein rich food consumed by humans (1). The global aquaculture industry has grown by 5% annually over the past 20 years (2, 3). However, more recently, the practice of aquaculture has encountered many challenges, one being disease outbreak caused by microbial pathogens (4). Channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) were introduced to China from the United States in 1984. After adapting to the environment in China, there was an explosive growth rate in the breeding yield and area. Channel catfish are a major component of freshwater fish culture in China. However, disease in these fish lead to a bottleneck restricting further growth of the channel catfish industry. The main pathogenic microorganisms infecting channel catfish include Aeromonas hydrophila, Yersinia ruckeri, Edwardsiella ictaluri and Streptococcus iniae, which have resulted in great economic loss for the aquaculture industry (4–10). Y. ruckeri is a gram-negative bacterium and the cause of enteric red mouth disease (ERM) in fish (11). ERM is a serious disease prevalent in aquaculture worldwide and is commonly observed in rainbow trout, sturgeon and channel catfish (12–16). Sick channel catfish show sepsis and inflammation in most organs, including the trunk kidney, spleen, liver and gastrointestinal tract (6). During the early stage of infection, the pathogen may invade into the gills and gastrointestinal epitheliums. Later, the infection may enter the blood circulation system and infect the spleen and trunk kidney, accumulate in the lymphoid organs and finally destroy the immune system (17). Y. ruckeri is a facultative, intracellular pathogen that can survive in macrophages in vitro and in vivo. In fact, there is quite a bit more to understand about the physiology of Y. ruckeri since most research has been focused on single virulence factors, such as extracellular toxins, high affinity iron uptake systems and resistance to innate immune mechanisms (18–26). Liu et al. identified that Toll/IL-1 receptors containing the proteins stir-1, stir-2 and stir-3 synergistically assisted the immune escape of Y. ruckeri SC09 (27, 28). This study also found that the virulence protein of Y. ruckeri TIR mediated immune escape by targeting the MyD88 receptor (29). The molecular mechanisms behind the infection of channel catfish by Y. ruckeri is still not very clear. Infection is a life and death struggle between the host and its pathogen (30). In this struggle, both the pathogen and host must mobilize all of their available resources to win (31). The transcriptomic profiles for both the host and pathogen vastly alter during the infection process (32, 33). Traditional RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) technology only reflects the host transcriptome (34) and does not detect the host and pathogen transcriptome simultaneously. However, dual RNA-seq can provide analysis of the interaction between the host and pathogen transcriptomes. Dual RNA-seq has been used to study a variety of bacterial infections, including cell and animal infection models and has identified many key genes related to host-pathogen interactions (35). To better understand the interaction between channel catfish and Y. ruckeri, an infection model was established to analyze dual RNA-seq data of the trunk kidney at different stages of infection and to monitor changes in the transcriptomes of both channel catfish and Y. ruckeri. Results obtained during this study will better clarify the host-pathogen interaction between channel catfish and Y. ruckeri.