Introduction Dynemicin A is an anthraquinone-fused ten-membered enediyne and a metabolite of Micromonospora chersina ATCC53710. Like many other enediynes, dynemicin has a novel molecular architecture, a notable mode of action and potent cytotoxicity (Thorson et al., 2000 ▸; Van Lanen & Shen, 2008 ▸). Dynemicin comprises an enediyne core, which is common to all enediynes, and peripheral moieties (Fig. 1 ▸), which give the enediynes structural diversity. The main ring of the dynemicin core contains two acetylenic groups conjugated to a double bond in a ten-membered carbocyle. The enediyne core structural unit (termed the warhead) is central to the fundamental mechanism of action. The anthraquinone group on the peripheral moeity of dynemicin intercalates into the minor groove of DNA to confer binding specificity (Sugiura et al., 1990 ▸). In the presence of NADPH or thiol, the quinone is reduced to hydroquinone, leading to opening of the epoxide (Avendaño & Menéndez, 2015 ▸), which triggers the activation of the enediyne core. Dynemicin then undergoes a Bergman cycloaromatization to form a reactive 1,4-dehydrobenzene bi­radical that is capable of abstracting H atoms from the DNA backbone, causing single- or double-stranded DNA scission. The high reactivity of enediynes with DNA makes them quite toxic. In natural environments, some microorganisms producing enediynes protect themselves from their cytotoxic action by a self-resistance mechanism that uses a self-sacrificing protein (Biggins et al., 2003 ▸; Elshahawi et al., 2014 ▸) or specialized ABC transporters to export the toxin (Beis & Rebuffat, 2019 ▸). In cancer therapy, the toxicity of enediynes has been exploited by conjugating the molecules to tumor-specific monoclonal antibodies in polymer-assisted delivery systems to prevent premature cytotoxic effects on other important cells in the body (Abe & Otsuki, 2002 ▸; Shah, 2017 ▸). Dynemicin can be produced by organic synthesis or in M. chersina. The total chemical synthesis of enediynes is challenging, but has been achieved for dynemicin (Nicolaou et al., 1991 ▸, 1993 ▸; Shair et al., 1996 ▸; Myers et al., 1995 ▸). The cloning, sequencing and identification of the biosynthetic gene clusters of dynemicin has paved the way for in vitro studies of these biosynthetic enzymes (Gao & Thorson, 2008 ▸). The putative biosynthesis of dynemicin is correspondingly complex: the M. chersina whole genome sequence analysis revealed 60 open reading frames (ORFs) within the biosynthetic gene cluster related to dynemicin production. Using homology to other characterized genomes, these genes have been annotated to suggest functions such as biosynthesis of the enediyne core, maturation and regulation, while there are also those with as yet unknown functions (Gao & Thorson, 2008 ▸). The gene cluster contains a common iterative type I polyketide synthase (PKSE) that is essential for the biosynthesis of a precursor polyene (heptaene) which, in the presence of other accessory enzymes, forms the ten-membered enediyne core of dynemicin (Liu et al., 2003 ▸). Evidence has accumulated that the PKSE product is also the precursor of the anthraquinone, and the biosynthesis of this moiety proceeds through a δ-thiolactone iodoanthracene intermediate (Cohen & Townsend, 2018 ▸). While some insight into the conversion of the iodo­anthracene to the anthraquinone has recently been reported upon examination of the biosynthesis of sungeidines (Ma et al., 2021 ▸), which, like dynemicin, are anthraquinone-fused ten-membered enediynes, the steps leading to the iodoanthracene in addition to the enediyne core remain mostly unknown. This study targets one of several proteins of unknown function encoded by a gene within the biosynthetic gene cluster of dynemicin, herein named DynF. The gene encoding DynF was originally annotated orf15 (Gao & Thorson, 2008 ▸) and was deposited as ORF18 with unknown function (GenBank accession No. ACB47058.1). The DynF ortholog Sgd15 was very recently demonstrated by gene inactivation to be essential for sungeidine biosynthesis, and no intermediates, including the iodoanthracene, were detected (Ma et al., 2021 ▸), suggesting that DynF and Sgd15 are involved in the early steps of processing the PKSE product to either the enediyne core or iodoanthracene, or potentially both. Here, we report the structural characterization of DynF using X-ray crystallo­graphy as an initial step towards deciphering its role in the biosynthesis of this unique anthraquinone-fused enediyne.