1. Introduction Agricultural production and global food security face substantial challenges. The world population is expected to exceed 9 billion by 2050, and an estimated 70% increase in food production over today’s production will be needed to ensure food security [1]. In this sense, the health of cultivated plants is of vital importance for the various economic sectors, because plants also provide essential products in addition to providing food for the population, such as wood, fibers, medicines, and bioenergy, among others. Plant diseases are responsible for quantitative and qualitative reduction in production, causing significant economic losses, and occasionally can lead to disastrous social consequences [2,3,4,5,6]. Plant diseases cause losses of up to 16% on a global scale [7], and studies have already pointed to losses directed at pathogens and more specifically to performed cultivations [3,8]. The potential for losses triggered by pathogens is indisputable, and their losses may vary depending on climatic factors, the culture and aggressiveness of the causal agent [8]. Diseases are traditionally managed through the use of genetic resistance (when available), and through the use of traditional chemical pesticides. The latter is highly used and has good efficiency in most cases [9]. However, this approach has experienced difficulties over the years due to its exhaustive use, which has led to the selection of pathogen populations which are resistant to the available active ingredients [10,11,12,13]. Driven by such a scenario, the study of complementary and alternative management measures has increased in recent years and has gained significant space in integrated management programs. As a result, biological control [14,15] and induced resistance [16,17,18,19] can be highlighted among the tools which have received attention. The potential of these two tools has been studied, explored and implemented in production fields, with numerous reports of successful cases in controlling pathogens. Plants and microorganisms in nature live in interactions among them, which can affect plant growth, development and even defense responses to biotic and abiotic stresses [20]. Endophytic fungi are among the microorganisms that live in interaction with plants and can be used in biological control and induced resistance, and comprise one of the most interesting groups with high potential for use and high diversity (Figure 1). They present advantages since they internally colonize tissues and therefore remain protected from more hostile environmental conditions which could threaten their survival [21]. Thus, endophytic fungi are increasingly being studied due to their ability to assist in plant health. For example, regarding induced resistance, Piriformospora indica is able to induce resistance in Musa spp. against Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. cubense tropical race 4 by increasing the activities of antioxidant enzymes [22]. On the other hand, the endophytic fungus Fusarium oxysporum strain EF119 sensu lato acts as a biocontrol agent for tomato plants against oomycetes such as Phytophthora infestans [23]. Endophytes have received attention both as biological control agents and as activators of the plant’s defense response to biotic and abiotic stresses. Both approaches generally have satisfactory results and have the potential to be used as auxiliary strategies to traditional control and to be implemented in integrated disease management systems. The biological pesticide market in Brazil grew more than 70% in 2018, with a turnover of around US$ 127.2 million. This value exceeded the percentage presented by the international market, where the expectation was that the sector would earn US$5 billion in 2020 and reach US$11 billion in 2025 [24]. In this review, we discuss how endophytic fungi can benefit and act in plant protection. To do so, we approach three examples of phyla and several different genera within these, although there is a predominance of endophytic fungi such as Trichoderma, Fusarium and Piriformospora (Figure 1). The use of endophytic fungi as biological control agents and resistance inducers is detailed, emphasizing some of the most recent information on this topic which has been explored. In addition, the basis of biological control and stress-induced resistance is highlighted to facilitate understanding of applying endophytic fungi in this context, and in the context of integrated management. Finally, perspectives are presented to better understand how the endophytic fungi area should evolve in the coming years. Although endophytic bacteria can also act to protect plants against biotic [25,26,27] and abiotic stresses, this is not the focus of this review.