Introduction Microbes are naturally surrounded by taxonomically different ones with which they compete for scarce resources and space1. Competition between different species is generally categorized as exploitation competition, which involves the rapid consumption of a limited resource2,3, and interference competition, which refers to direct antagonistic interactions4. Microbial antagonism is driven by diverse toxins, such as broad-spectrum antibiotics and strain-specific bacteriocins5,6, and is recognized as a key element regulating populations and determining their success within diverse communities7. The stunning diversity of both the categories and functions of antimicrobial metabolites among different species, results in the extraordinary complexity of interference competition between microbes with different phylogenetic relationships4,8. Accordingly, illustrating the driving forces and mechanisms of antagonistic competition is crucial for understanding and predicting microbial behaviors during community assemblage and succession2. Phylogenetic relatedness is considered to be closely associated with microbial competition, based on its determination of both primary and secondary metabolic profiles2,4. Despite the well-established negative correlation between exploitation competition and phylogenetic distance2, the process of interference competition is much more complicated and remains controversial. Russel et al. demonstrated that inhibition was more prevalent between closely related bacteria, and this negative correlation between antagonism and phylogeny was mediated by the overlap of the metabolic niche among different strains9. Conversely, other studies examined congeneric competition in Vibrio and Streptomyces and revealed that closely related strains competed less than phylogenetically distant strains, which was probably caused by the effect of the prior coexistence and distribution of secondary metabolites in different genomes7,10,11. Additionally, the positive relationship between kin discrimination and phylogeny was indicated within Bacillus subtilis, which was modulated by genes involved in antimicrobials and cell-surface modifiers12,13; however, this correlation was lost or even became a certain extent negative when more distantly Bacillus strains were tested for antagonism, probably being dependent on the demand of protecting public goods14. Taken together, the relationship between antagonism and phylogenetic distance with regard to microbes from different taxonomical scales or groups, as well as the involved biological mechanism, is still under debate, which limits both our understanding and application of these microbial interactions. Biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) are responsible for the production of various secondary metabolites that contribute to interference competition between different microbes15,16, and also usually provide resistance against the self-produced antibiotic to protect the host cell4,17,18. Although the relevance (or lack of relevance) of BGCs to antagonism or phylogeny has been evaluated in diverse microbes11,16,17,19–21, the involvement of BGCs profile in mediating the relationship between interference competition and phylogeny, has not been well addressed. Here, we hypothesize that the correlation between BGC and phylogenetic distance can predict the pattern of congeneric antagonism among different taxonomic groups, as strains possessing higher BGC similarity should have a lower probability of inhibiting each other. To test this hypothesis, we referred to the Gram-positive Bacillus as the target genus, which is a commonly recognized producer of multifarious secondary metabolites16,19,22–25, including nonribosomal lipopeptides (e.g., surfactin, iturin, and fengycin families produced by various species)23, nonribosomal polyketides (e.g., difficidin and macrolactin produced by B. amyloliquefaciens and B. velezensis)19, peptide-polyketide hybrid compound (e.g., zwittermicin produced by B. cereus and B. thuringiensis)24, and ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides (RiPPs; e.g., lichenicidin produced by B. licheniformis)26. Based on comparative genomic analysis, antagonistic assessments, and mutant-based verification, we show that the distribution profile of BGCs within Bacillus genomes is consistent with their phylogenetic relationship; accordingly, the congeneric antagonism among Bacillus strains positively correlates with phylogenetic distance, and this inhibition is dependent on the BGCs that specifically harbored by the antagonistic strain. Our results demonstrate that BGC-phylogeny coherence regulates the positive correlation between congeneric antagonism and phylogenetic distance.