1. Introduction Streptomycetes are Gram-positive soil-dwelling bacteria. The soil niche represents a harsh living environment where the natural microbial inhabitants have evolved various nutrient-acquiring and life-defending strategies. Streptomyces have a complex developmental life cycle that begins with germinating spores. They then form branching vegetative hyphae that differentiate into aerial mycelium and spores again [1,2,3,4]. Moreover, the streptomycetes possess extraordinary genetic equipment for sensing extracellular signals and producing various specialized metabolites [5]. Among other applications, these molecules encompass over two-thirds of the clinically useful antibiotics and other compounds of industrial value [6]. The developmental complexity and antibiotic biosynthesis of these organisms require a complex regulatory network, which is responsible for addressing proper responses to changes in environmental conditions [7]. In order to achieve such responses, a number of pleiotropic regulators are involved in the gene expression control of the streptomycetes. So-called regulatory RNAs represent one such regulatory sphere. A single RNA molecule may regulate multiple genes, thus broadly influencing the physiology of the cell [8]. These RNAs act either simply by base-pairing with target nucleotides, or by binding target proteins via their secondary structures. 6S RNA achieves gene regulation using the second strategy and is one of the best studied regulatory RNAs in bacteria [9]. 6S RNA has a direct influence on the transition between developmental stages thanks to its direct association with the sigma70-RNA polymerase holoenzymes (RNAP-HrdB in Streptomyces). The formation of such complexes interferes with exponential phase-specific transcription [10,11,12]. Due to its function, the promoter-like secondary structure of 6S RNA is highly conserved across the bacterial kingdom. This high degree of conservation has enabled the identification of more than 100 potential 6S RNA homologues in diverse eubacterial species, using computational searches [13]. Notably, however, Streptomyces were absent among those species in which 6S RNA was identified. We had developed a bioinformatic tool that detected two streptomycete 6S-like transcripts whose secondary structures exhibited convincing similarity with those of 6S RNAs found in other bacteria [14,15]. Subsequently, it was shown that a null mutation of one of these genes (scr3559), affected actinorhodin production in S. coelicolor [16]. To analyze the effect of the scr3559 RNA on cell morphology and physiology, we constructed a strain that over-expresses scr3559, with its gene placed under the control of a thiostrepton-inducible promoter. Interestingly, the levels of the scr3559 RNA were consistent with a strong effect on the exponential growth of S. coelicolor, as well as on its secondary metabolite production. This suggests that the scr3559 RNA functions as an important developmental regulator.