Introduction Moringa oleifera (or the miracle tree) is a drought-tolerant wild plant species of the family Moringaceae (Olson and Flora of North America Editorial Committee, 2010). This species is native to several habitats in Southern America, Africa and Asia including Saudi Arabia (Al-Eisawi and Al-Ruzayza, 2015). This plant is commonly used in traditional herbal medicine due to its health benefits as it possesses anti-fungal, anti-viral, anti-depressant as well as anti-inflammatory properties (Olson and Flora of North America Editorial Committee, 2010). Seed oil and leaf powder of M. oleifera contain a variety of useful proteins, vitamins (A, B1, B2, B3, B6, and C) and minerals (e.g., Ca, K, Mg, Fe, P, and Zn) (Gopalakrishnan et al., 2016). The plant is also used in treating edema, asthma and diabetes, in reducing high blood pressure, in treating stomach complaints, in fighting against bacterial diseases and cancer, in making bones healthier, and in healing skin wounds (Gopalakrishnan et al., 2016). Recent advances in next generation sequencing (NGS) technology and subsequent bioinformatics approaches allow the accurate detection of microbial composition and function in the phyllospheric and rhizospheric regions of the plant (Vorholt, 2012; Bai et al., 2015; Vorholt et al., 2017). The rhizospheric region is regarded as a hotspot of effective microbial activity, recovery of new antibiotics and potential transfer of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) (Blau et al., 2019). NGS approaches of amplicon (or 16S rRNA) and metagenomic whole genome shotgun sequencing (mWGS) are used to decipher microbial composition and predicted function. Advantages of the latter approach include the ability to study the genomes of archaea, bacteria, fungi, and viruses and reaching accurate insights into taxonomy, biodiversity, phylogenetic relationships, and functionality of microbiomes (Segata et al., 2011). mWGS also allows studying the influences of environmental conditions and host-microbe interactions in shaping microbiome signatures and allows deciphering new ARGs and antibiotics in the phyllospheric and rhizospheric regions of a given plant especially if this plant is edible by human or livestock (Tringe et al., 2005; Raes et al., 2007). Identification and development of new antibiotics was for years a top research priority among pharmaceutical companies (Dutescu and Hillier, 2021). However, the treatment of pathogenic bacteria is increasingly hindered by the ability of bacteria to generate resistance against antibiotics due to occurrence of gene mutations, or due to a bacterial taxon being transformed with ARGs of other bacterial taxon; a process called horizontal gene transfer (HGT) (Bäckhed et al., 2015). The latter incidence raises a concern that ARGs integrated in mobile genetic elements (MGEs) of rhizospheric or phyllospheric bacteria can contaminate an edible plant, thus, can eventually be transmitted to human gut microbiome. If a certain microbial pathogen exists in the latter environment, then a risk of acquired resistance against clinical antibiotics is raised. Up to date, no enough attention was paid to the serious incidence of horizontal transfer of ARGs existing in plant microbiomes to human gut or skin microbiome (Chen et al., 2019). In addition, the influence of resistome of native or wild plants was almost neglected (Obermeier et al., 2021). The study of rhizobiome of native plants allows the detection of natural antibiotics along with new versatile ARGs due to the existence of highly diversified microbial community in this dynamic region. In the present study, we have deciphered abundant ARGs and predicted their metabolic processes that exist in rhizobiome of the native wild plant Moringa oleifera in order to detect the risks on human health due to the possible occurrence of HGT if organs of this plant were used by human either in human nutrition or herbal medicine.