Introduction The barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) β-d-glucan glucohydrolase HvExoI is the only plant family 3 glycoside hydrolase (GH3) for which the atomic structure is available1–3, although the Carbohydrate-Active Enzymes CAZy database4 lists nearly 48,400 GH3 entries (August 2022) from archaea, bacteria, fungi, and eukaryotes, including economically important plants Triticum, Oryza, Glycine, Zea, Brassica, Medicago, Phaseolus, and Solanum. HvExoI folds into a two-domain structure consisting of an (α/β)8 barrel (domain 1) and an (α/β)6 sandwich (domain 2) with a 13 Å-deep active site pocket embracing the subsites −1 and +1, positioned at the interface between the two domains. At the −1 subsite, the pocket contains the catalytic nucleophile Asp285 and the acid/base catalyst Glu491, while the +1 subsite is shaped in a clamp with a coin slot formed by the Trp286 and Trp434 residues that hold β-d-glucosides entering the active site in a productive mode for hydrolysis1–3,5 (Fig. 1a, b). HvExoI catalyses the hydrolytic removal of nonreducing glucose (Glc) moiety from a broad spectrum of poly- and oligomeric β-d-glucosides. This hydrolytic reaction underpins a vital role of HvExoI during plant growth and development, to participate during e.g. primary root extension and the recycling of mixed-linkage (1,4;1,3)-β-d-glucans during germination and root elongation1,3,6. The capacity of HvExoI to hydrolyse a panel of β-d-glucosides was rationalised from the observation that non-reducing Glc at the −1 subsite is locked into a fixed position through a network of hydrogen bonds (H-bonds), while the reducing Glc moiety at the +1 subsite is constrained through stacking interactions, and thus the flexibility of attached substrates and their projection is unencumbered allowing HvExoI to accommodate isomeric (1,2)-, (1,3)-, (1,4)- and (1,6)-linked β-d-glucosides2,3. It was estimated that the strength of binding through aromatic residues could be in the range of 2-5 kcal/mol7.Fig. 1Exo-hydrolytic enzymes of the GH3 family with an entrapped Glc molecule and a ligand-free form, and their phylogeny.a
Hordeum vulgare HvExoI with entrapped Glc (PDB 3WLH; atomic colours), Bacteroides ovatus β-glucosidase with perfused Glc (PDB 5JP0; green cpk), and a ligand-free form of Pseudoalteromonas sp. exo-(1,4;1,3)-β-glucanase (PDB 3UT0; yellow cpk). Distances ached of HvExoI residues to Glc in the −1 subsite (black dashes) are within 3.3 Å. HvExoI and structurally equivalent residues in 3UT0 and 5JP0 superpose with respective RMSD values of 0.7 Å and 1.2 Å. b Surface morphology of the active site pocket of HvExoI coloured by an electrostatic potential: white, neutral; red, −5 kT·e−1. Separations (dashed lines) between Glc and key interacting residues are within 3.3 Å. The positions of the −1 subsites in panels a and b are indicated. c Unrooted phylogenetic tree of representative GH3 family members (accession numbers listed in Supplementary Table 1) revealed the presence of four major clades with five activities [β-d-glucan glucohydrolases (EC 3.2.1.-), β-d-glucosidases (EC 3.2.1.21), β-N-acetylhexosaminidases (EC 3.2.1.52), β-d-xylosidases (EC 3.2.1.37), and α-l-arabinofuranosidases (EC 3.2.1.55)]. In β-d-glucan glucohydrolases, three subclades were identified with residue variability in the aromatic clamp (residue numbering corresponding to HvExoI; PDB 1EX1). The percentage of replicate trees with taxa clustering together in the bootstrap test (1000 replicates) are shown at node bipartitions. Fig. 1Exo-hydrolytic enzymes of the GH3 family with an entrapped Glc molecule and a ligand-free form, and their phylogeny.a
Hordeum vulgare HvExoI with entrapped Glc (PDB 3WLH; atomic colours), Bacteroides ovatus β-glucosidase with perfused Glc (PDB 5JP0; green cpk), and a ligand-free form of Pseudoalteromonas sp. exo-(1,4;1,3)-β-glucanase (PDB 3UT0; yellow cpk). Distances ached of HvExoI residues to Glc in the −1 subsite (black dashes) are within 3.3 Å. HvExoI and structurally equivalent residues in 3UT0 and 5JP0 superpose with respective RMSD values of 0.7 Å and 1.2 Å. b Surface morphology of the active site pocket of HvExoI coloured by an electrostatic potential: white, neutral; red, −5 kT·e−1. Separations (dashed lines) between Glc and key interacting residues are within 3.3 Å. The positions of the −1 subsites in panels a and b are indicated. c Unrooted phylogenetic tree of representative GH3 family members (accession numbers listed in Supplementary Table 1) revealed the presence of four major clades with five activities [β-d-glucan glucohydrolases (EC 3.2.1.-), β-d-glucosidases (EC 3.2.1.21), β-N-acetylhexosaminidases (EC 3.2.1.52), β-d-xylosidases (EC 3.2.1.37), and α-l-arabinofuranosidases (EC 3.2.1.55)]. In β-d-glucan glucohydrolases, three subclades were identified with residue variability in the aromatic clamp (residue numbering corresponding to HvExoI; PDB 1EX1). The percentage of replicate trees with taxa clustering together in the bootstrap test (1000 replicates) are shown at node bipartitions. Exo-hydrolytic enzymes of the GH3 family with an entrapped Glc molecule and a ligand-free form, and their phylogeny. a
Hordeum vulgare HvExoI with entrapped Glc (PDB 3WLH; atomic colours), Bacteroides ovatus β-glucosidase with perfused Glc (PDB 5JP0; green cpk), and a ligand-free form of Pseudoalteromonas sp. exo-(1,4;1,3)-β-glucanase (PDB 3UT0; yellow cpk). Distances ached of HvExoI residues to Glc in the −1 subsite (black dashes) are within 3.3 Å. HvExoI and structurally equivalent residues in 3UT0 and 5JP0 superpose with respective RMSD values of 0.7 Å and 1.2 Å. b Surface morphology of the active site pocket of HvExoI coloured by an electrostatic potential: white, neutral; red, −5 kT·e−1. Separations (dashed lines) between Glc and key interacting residues are within 3.3 Å. The positions of the −1 subsites in panels a and b are indicated. c Unrooted phylogenetic tree of representative GH3 family members (accession numbers listed in Supplementary Table 1) revealed the presence of four major clades with five activities [β-d-glucan glucohydrolases (EC 3.2.1.-), β-d-glucosidases (EC 3.2.1.21), β-N-acetylhexosaminidases (EC 3.2.1.52), β-d-xylosidases (EC 3.2.1.37), and α-l-arabinofuranosidases (EC 3.2.1.55)]. In β-d-glucan glucohydrolases, three subclades were identified with residue variability in the aromatic clamp (residue numbering corresponding to HvExoI; PDB 1EX1). The percentage of replicate trees with taxa clustering together in the bootstrap test (1000 replicates) are shown at node bipartitions. Since the HvExoI structure was elucidated1–3, many prokaryotic, fungal and unclassified metagenome GH3 structures have become available but provided little information on the substrate specificity of this class of enzymes. These include two-domain bacterial β-N-acetylglucosaminidases, for example, from Bacillus subtilis8, and a β-N-acetylhexosaminidase from Salmonella typhimurium9, while a β-hexosaminidase from Burkholderia cenocepacia10 folds into a single-domain (α/β)8 sandwich structure. Several three-domain architectures consisting of an (α/β)8 barrel, an (α/β)6 sandwich, and another β-sandwich domain were revealed in β-glucosidases from Thermotoga neapolitana11, Hypocrea jecorina12 and Aspergillus aculeatus13, in a β-N-acetylglucosaminidase from Thermotoga neapolitana14, in a (1,4;1,3)-β-exo-glucanase from Pseudoalteromonas sp. BB115, and in a β-glucosidase JMB19063 isolated from metagenome16. These additional β-sandwich domains are described as fibronectin type III or Ig-like β-sandwich folds and have similar architectures. Four-domains structures consisting of (α/β)8 barrel, an (α/β)6 sandwich, and two β-sandwich domain folds (PA14 and fibronectin type III) were identified in the β-glucosidases from Kluyveromyces marxianus17, Aspergillus fumigatus, A. oryzae18 and Streptomyces venezuelae19. The precise roles of these additional β-sandwich domains have not been fully clarified. However, in some GH3 enzymes these domains are thought to be linked to substrate binding and specificity17, protein structure stability14,20, and oligomerisation, meaning that dimerisation is required for catalytic activity16. Although the details of the catalytic mechanism in HvExoI were reported1–3,21, the precise information on the binding of positionally isomeric β-d-glucosides at the atomic level remains limited. Recently, we envisaged that β-d-glucan glucohydrolases, such as HvExoI, adopt so-called substrate-product assisted processive catalysis, where after an incoming substrate binds in a productive mode, the Glc product evokes the formation of a transient lateral cavity, which serves as a conduit for its egress to allow for the next catalytic cycle22. To our knowledge, this type of processive catalysis (or non-dissociative sequential degradation) discovered in HvExoI22 has not been described in hydrolases with a closed pocket-shaped catalytic site. In doing so22, we defined processive catalysis (which we termed substrate-product assisted processivity) in broader terms than those used for the definitions of the tunnel-, groove-, ridge-, or cleft-like active sites of GHs23–25. Considering that HvExoI operates on plant cell wall (1,3;1,4)-β-d-glucan polysaccharides, processive catalysis (as a form of efficient catalysis) in this enzyme is expected as rapid substrate hydrolysis is critical to embryo development during seed germination5,26. Processive catalysis has been defined in (1,3)-β-d-glucan endohydrolases27, (1,4)-β-d-glucan endohydrolases28, cellobiohydrolases23, and chitobiohydrolases24,25,29. Conversely, exo-acting hydrolases21,22 and β-d-glucosidases30 with closed funnel-, crater-, or pocket-shaped active sites have been deemed to be nonprocessive30. The work with processive enzymes suggested the role of aromatic and polar amino acid residues to assist with stacking and H-bond interactions for polysaccharide sliding motions through the catalytic sites22–25,27–29,31. In this context, our aim was to provide direct structural evidence for the binding of β-d-glucosides and the unbinding of their hydrolytic products and investigate the relationship between reactant movements and processivity. Here, we capitalise on a unique feature of HvExoI to bind a panel of isomeric β-d-glucosides through the aromatic clamp of two Trp residues, and elucidate, how this precisely facilitates substrate binding, catalytic efficiency, and substrate-product assisted processivity. We present atomic details of HvExoI wild-type (WT) and its Ala, His, Phe, and Tyr mutants of the Trp286/Trp434 clamp in the complex with positionally isomeric thio-analogues. Based on these structures, we evaluate the reactant movements on the nanoscale in HvExoI via classical molecular dynamics (cMD), Gaussian accelerated MD (GaMD) simulations and GPathFinder calculations. These findings combined with modelling of the conformational behaviour of reactants via cMD and quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) MD metadynamics, indicate that in this GH3 exo-hydrolase the aromatic clamp fulfils the role of a recognition platform ensuring effective carbohydrate-binding due to cooperative rotational and translational movements. This knowledge expands on the applicability of bioengineering of carbohydrate-processing enzymes to improve catalytic rates, and stability, and to understand product inhibition (important in drug discovery), as the traditional industrial approaches are being increasingly replaced by enzyme-based technologies.