1. Introduction Biological control of soil-borne plant diseases by beneficial bacteria is a promising ecofriendly disease management strategy. Commercial application of beneficial bacteria-mediated biological control can be improved by increasing the disease control efficacy and reducing the control variations [1]. Understanding how beneficial bacteria suppress plant diseases will help us increase the efficacy and consistency of biological control [2]. Aphanomyces root rot of pea (Pisum sativum), caused by the oomycete pathogen Aphanomyces euteiches, is one of the most damaging soil-borne diseases that constrain pea production worldwide [3]. Interest in using beneficial bacteria to control A. euteiches is growing because of the unavailability of resistant pea cultivars, limited chemical management options, concerns of potential fungicide resistance by the pathogens, and the increasing requests for ecofriendly management alternatives [4,5]. Several beneficial bacteria, including strains of Pseudomonas spp., Bacillus mycoides, Rhizobium spp., Pantoea agglomerans, Lysobacter capsici, and Burkholderia cepacia, were found to inhibit the A. euteiches growth in culture media and/or reduce the disease incidence in greenhouse [6,7,8]. Results of these studies suggest that antibiosis likely contributes to the pathogen suppression and disease control. For example, the beneficial bacteria that reduced the disease severity of pea Aphanomyces root rot in growth camber biocontrol assays were also found to inhibit the A. euteiches mycelial growth on culture plates [8]. However, the antibiotic(s) required by the beneficial bacteria to inhibit the A. euteiches growth and control the disease remain(s) unknown. Considering the well-recognized and important roles of antibiotics in biocontrol [9], filling this knowledge gap will advance our understanding of the biocontrol mechanism of pea Aphanomyces root rot and improve the disease control efficacy of the antibiotic-producing beneficial bacteria. The goals of this study were to identify beneficial bacteria-derived antibiotics that inhibit the growth of A. euteiches and characterize the role of those antibiotics in the tri-trophic interactions of A. euteiches, pea plant and the beneficial bacteria. Antagonistic bacterial isolates that belong to different genera, including Pseudomonas, Paenibacillus, Bacillus, Pseudarthrobacter, and Chryseobacterium, were identified from pea rhizosphere soils in this work. We focus on species of the Pseudomonas genus because strains of this group have been constantly identified to suppress pea Aphanomyces root rot [8,10]. Pseudomonas protegens strain Pf-5, a soil bacterium which is well-known for its wide-spectrum antimicrobial activity due to the production of many antibiotics including pyoluteorin, pyrrolnitrin, 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (2,4-DAPG), orfamide A, rhizoxin, hydrogen cyanide [11,12,13,14], and Pseudomonas fluorescens strain 2P24, a wheat rhizosphere bacterium with antibacterial and antifungal activities [15,16], were used in this study. The inhibitory effects of P. protegens Pf-5 and P. fluorescens 2P24 on the growth of A. euteiches were measured. The antibiotic required by P. protegens Pf-5 and P. fluorescens 2P24 to inhibit A. euteiches was identified and the roles of the antibiotic in biological control of pea Aphanomyces root rot were investigated.