1. Introduction Antibiotic resistance—bacterial infections that no longer respond to the drugs used to treat them—is a global health crisis of growing concern [1,2]. The demand for existing antibiotics is too high, which drives the evolution of resistance in pathogens [2,3,4]. The supply of new classes of antibiotics that can treat drug-resistant infections is too low, which leaves us with few treatment options for the most serious infections [5,6,7]. To communicate the scale of the problem, researchers have used graphical timelines that show how the rate of antibiotic discovery has slowed in recent times. These timelines are valuable tools for science communication, but often disagree with one another and lack clarity. In previous reviews, the definitions used for the date of the discovery of an antibiotic, its first clinical use, and the emergence of resistance to it, either are not disclosed or lack internal consistency. Examples include the non-disclosure of methods used to generate a timeline for antibiotic discovery [5]; inconsistency in the definition of when an antibiotic was introduced into the clinic [8]; not defining the “year of discovery” or “year of introduction” categories and employing a scale with a resolution of decades [9]; and the CDC’s 2013 Antibiotic Threats Report, which includes an antibiotic resistance timeline “based on early reports in the literature”, but with a lack of clarity as to whether this refers to in vitro, in vivo, or clinical data [10]. We conducted a systematic literature review to produce a more precise timeline for antibiotic discovery, introduction, and resistance. Antibiotics can be classified by their origins, structures, and mechanisms of action. We took the 38 classes of antibiotics in clinical use (Figure 1), as defined by Hutchings et al. [8], and consistently applied the following definitions to them:Discovery: when a compound or extract—not merely an organism—was first reported to have antibiotic activity. In some cases, this was decades after the compound was first discovered or synthesized.First clinical use: the first use of the antibiotic to treat a bacterial infection: in modern terms, a phase II trial. Clinical studies of tolerance and toxicity are not included. The approval of an antibiotic for human use is not used because several of these drugs predate regulatory bodies.Resistance: the first report of clinically isolated bacteria resistant to the antibiotic. Discovery: when a compound or extract—not merely an organism—was first reported to have antibiotic activity. In some cases, this was decades after the compound was first discovered or synthesized. First clinical use: the first use of the antibiotic to treat a bacterial infection: in modern terms, a phase II trial. Clinical studies of tolerance and toxicity are not included. The approval of an antibiotic for human use is not used because several of these drugs predate regulatory bodies. Resistance: the first report of clinically isolated bacteria resistant to the antibiotic. We hope that our timeline will be a useful resource to the antibiotic research and public health communities. We have included our data and sources so that the timeline can be verified, updated, and modified. Figure 1Chemical structures of the 38 classes of antibiotics. (1) Arsphenamine in its (1a) trivalent and (1b) pentavalent forms. General chemical structures of (2) a penicillin, (3) a sulfonamide, (4) a sulphone, (5) a polypeptide, (6) a salicylate, (7) an aminoglycoside, (8) a phenazine, (9) a nitrofuran, (10) a cyclic peptide, (11) a cephalosporin, (12) an amphenicol, (13) a polymyxin, (14) an enniatin, (15) a tetracycline, (16) a diaminopyrimidine, (17) a tuberactinomycin, (18) a pleuromutilin, (19) a macrolide, (20) a nicotinamide, (21) a streptogramin, (22) a thioisonicotinamide, (23) a glycopeptide, (24) a lincosamide, (25) a cycloserine, (26) an ansamycin, (27) a fusidane, (28) a nitroimidazole, (29) ethambutol, (30) a quinolone, (31) a phosphonate, (32) a mupirocin, (33) a lipiarmycin, (34) a carbapenem, (35) a monobactam, (36) an oxazolidinone, (37) a lipopeptide, and (38) a diarylquinoline. Chemical structures of the 38 classes of antibiotics. (1) Arsphenamine in its (1a) trivalent and (1b) pentavalent forms. General chemical structures of (2) a penicillin, (3) a sulfonamide, (4) a sulphone, (5) a polypeptide, (6) a salicylate, (7) an aminoglycoside, (8) a phenazine, (9) a nitrofuran, (10) a cyclic peptide, (11) a cephalosporin, (12) an amphenicol, (13) a polymyxin, (14) an enniatin, (15) a tetracycline, (16) a diaminopyrimidine, (17) a tuberactinomycin, (18) a pleuromutilin, (19) a macrolide, (20) a nicotinamide, (21) a streptogramin, (22) a thioisonicotinamide, (23) a glycopeptide, (24) a lincosamide, (25) a cycloserine, (26) an ansamycin, (27) a fusidane, (28) a nitroimidazole, (29) ethambutol, (30) a quinolone, (31) a phosphonate, (32) a mupirocin, (33) a lipiarmycin, (34) a carbapenem, (35) a monobactam, (36) an oxazolidinone, (37) a lipopeptide, and (38) a diarylquinoline.