1. Introduction Climate change has exacerbated the multifarious effects of environmental stresses on crop growth and development, thereby compromising sustainable agricultural productivity worldwide. Biotic stresses in the form of insects, bacteria, viruses, fungi, nematodes, arachnids, and weeds account for over 30% of losses from the annual global food production capacity, or approximately US$500 billion [1]. Abiotic stresses including drought, extreme temperatures, and salinity are major yield-limiting factors of economically important food crops globally [2]. Of these stresses, drought is one of the most significant, given that its frequency and severity has been forecasted to increase due to climate change [3]. Greater effort has therefore been directed towards the implementation of sustainable agricultural management and drought mitigation strategies in major crop-growing regions worldwide. To compensate for their immobile nature, plants acclimatise to various environmental stresses with an array of complex molecular, physiological, and biochemical adaptations, which ultimately allow them to survive and even maintain potential rates of growth [4]. These adaptations may be expressed constitutively, or in many cases, are activated only in the presence of stressors. The evolved innate immunity or basal resistance of a plant is regulated by an intricate network of endogenous signalling molecules, receptor proteins, and transcriptional regulators. In response to environmental stress, plants exhibit an upregulation of the expression of stress-related genes encoding for defence proteins, such as trypsin protease inhibitors (PI) and pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins, which act against herbivory and pathogen attack, respectively. There is also an elevated production of secondary metabolites including osmoprotectants and toxins with deterrent/antifeedant activity [5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13]. Timely defence responses to biotic and abiotic stresses offer a fitness benefit to plants that largely depends on the capacity to quickly and accurately recognise external stress stimuli [14,15]. Upon stress perception, the plant will activate various defence-signalling pathways, leading to subsequent gene expression [15,16]. Among the secondary metabolites, phytochemicals in the form of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) have been identified as chemical-signalling molecules involved in both intra- and inter-plant communication, providing a fitness benefit to both the emitter and neighbouring receiver plants [17]. Plants respond to various biotic and abiotic stresses by emitting VOCs that fall into various compound classes, namely: terpenoids, benzenoids/phenylpropanoids, and fatty acid derivatives [17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25]. Recent studies in various crop species have explored an intriguing possibility of developing stress tolerance in plants through their exposure to VOCs from stressed neighbours, a process referred to as “priming” [5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,26,27,28,29,30]. In the classical study by Karban et al. [27], volatile-mediated airborne signalling between native tobacco (Nicotiana attenuata) and sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata) was demonstrated. The sagebrush plants were clipped experimentally to mimic insect damage, and the emitted VOCs induced herbivore resistance in the neighbouring tobacco plants. A follow-up study by Kessler et al. [31] reported an upregulation of herbivore-regulated genes in the receiver tobacco plants, but with no evidence of direct elicitation of defensive secondary metabolites. Interestingly, following post-challenge with Manduca sexta caterpillars, the receiver tobacco plants had an accelerated production of PI proteins, which was not evident in plants not previously exposed to the clipped sagebrush volatiles [31]. This study demonstrated how volatile-mediated plant–plant interaction primes defence responses in non-stressed receiver plants, inducing a faster and stronger response to a real stress. The production of defensive metabolites such as (Z)-3-hexenyl-vicianoside [12] and genes of defence-related enzymes including PI, threonine deaminase, and α-dioxygenase [31] have been shown to increase as a result of VOC exposure, ultimately conferring tolerance or resistance in non-stressed plants. Overall, however, the signalling pathways and mechanisms in volatile-mediated plant–plant interactions are vaguely understood and have been sparsely investigated in stress physiology studies. This review offers a comprehensive synopsis of volatile-mediated inter-plant communication, referencing studies published from 2000–2021 and using Google Scholar and Web of Science as the main academic search engines. It explores the range of VOCs that elicit various stress responses in non-stressed, neighbouring receiver plants in the face of both biotic and abiotic stresses. Understanding how plants can prepare for impending stresses by recognising VOC signals from stressed plants without themselves having to experience the actual stress is a noble endeavour towards the development of crops that are more tolerant against environmental stresses. Furthermore, the identification of specific receptors, transcription factors (TFs), and other regulatory proteins involved in volatile-mediated signalling, as well as the characterisation of the various defence-signalling pathways induced after VOC perception, is necessary for a full appreciation of airborne signalling between plants under stress. The integration of physiological, metabolome, and transcriptome analyses in volatile-mediated signalling and defence priming will be discussed.