Introduction The Gram-positive Streptomyces has been intensively investigated due to their outstanding ability to produce numerous secondary metabolites, many of which are valuable in industrial and pharmaceutical applications [1, 2]. Particularly, some high-yield industrial strains of Streptomyces are commonly used for the production of many bioactive natural products (NPs) such as tetracycline (anti-infection), daunorubicin (anti-cancer), and rapamycin (immunosuppressant) [1]. Some of these industrial strains also have the potential to be remolded into suitable cell factories for the heterologous synthesis of valuable pharmaceutical molecules due to abundant precursors supply of NPs as well as sophisticated post modification systems [3]. Most of the industrial strains were, in most cases, poorly characterized physiologically and genetically. This has resulted in a serious limitation of applying molecular genetics approaches since efficient tools have been developed for just a few type strains [4]. High-efficient genetic engineering techniques, such as DNA fragment deletion methods, play a significant role in the research of microbial cell factories. Through DNA fragment deletion, we can explore the functions of essential genes, block the metabolic pathways of by-products, reduce the toxic metabolites, and thereby increase the yield of target products. Unfortunately, most deletion systems are much more difficult to be applied in the industrial strains compared to the best-studied type strains like Streptomyces coelicolor M145, Streptomyces lividans TK24, and Streptomyces albidoflavus J1074 [3, 5], and one important reason for this is the lack of available episomal vectors. In Streptomyces, several strategies for mutagenesis have already been developed, specifically, the PCR-targeting system and the CRISPR/Cas9 system, which are two of the most powerful tools. Although CRISPR/Cas9 system enumerated success in several groups for genome editing in Streptomyces [6-8], its dependence on available episomal vectors and the inferred toxicity of Cas9 limited its application. For instance, the CRISPR/Cas9 system could not work in several industrial strains including Streptomyces chattanoogensis L10, Streptomyces tsukubaensis YN06, and Streptomyces albus ZD11 [9]. On the other hand, the PCR-targeting system is highly reliable but presents lower efficiency due to the laborious and time-consuming double-crossover mutant screening process [10]. In this context, the chromogenic reporter system for colony screening is a good selection to reduce the time and cost for mutant screening. Elsewhere, indigoidine synthetase (IDGS) catalyzes the condensation of two L-Glutamine molecules to form one molecule of water-insoluble blue pigment indigoidine [11]. Taking advantage of the blue color of indigoidine, several groups of researchers have realized efficient gene editing based on the IDGS reporter system in Streptomyces [10-12]. Li et al. used idgS gene cloned from Streptomyces lavendulae CGMCC 4.1386 to knock out the sco4069 gene in S. coelicolor M1146 and the asfA-y gene in Streptomyces sp. YN86 [11]. Kormanec et al. developed an efficient system for markerless deletions and stable integrations in S. lividans TK24 based on the bpsA gene [10]. Wang et al. developed an updated version of the CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing system for actinomycetes based on IdgS to address the plasmid curing problem. They performed the deletion of a single gene actIORFI in S. coelicolor M145 [12]. However, to the best of our knowledge, the applications of the IDGS reporter system primarily in the industrial Streptomyces strains remain elusive. Therefore, in this work, an IDGS encoding gene, sshg_00313 (designated SaindC in this study) was cloned from S. albidoflavus J1074 [13]. The function of SaIndC was verified, and subsequently, the SaindC-based efficient markerless deletion system independent of the episomal vector was constructed. Moreover, three biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) and a non-essential chromosomal region were respectively knocked out from three industrial Streptomyces strains namely S. chattanoogensis L10 [14], S. coeruleorubidus, and S. albus ZD11[15] based on this deletion system. Collectively, our results indicate that the SaindC-based deleting system is efficient and reliable for large DNA fragment deletion in industrial streptomycetes.