Introduction During fertilization, parental pronuclei (PN) are formed from the genomes of the sperm and oocyte. Although co-existing in the cytoplasm of the zygote, the PNs separated before the first mitotic cell cycle, and then the two haplotypes fuse to form the new individual genome. There are many differential points in epigenetic factors (e.g., histone modifications, histone variants, and chromatin dynamics) between PNs before fusion. However, the mechanisms underlying parental asymmetry and its role remain unclear, and even less is known whether it is controlled by the interactions between the parental PNs. The results of our previous study revealed that the chromatin of the male PN derived from the sperm (sp-mPN) was comparatively more dynamic among the preimplantation embryonic stages1. Interestingly, the chromatin of the female PN (fPN) is significantly less dynamic than that of the sp-mPN. Thus, the dynamics of the zygotic parental chromatin structure are asymmetrical. In addition to chromatin dynamics, the parental chromatin is asymmetric with size (♂ > ♀)2, transcriptional regulation and activity (♂ > ♀)3, epigenetic active and repressive of histone markers (♂ < ♀)4 and the amounts of reprogramming factors (♂ > ♀)5. Round spermatids are haploid precursor cells present during the spermatogenetic stage soon after meiosis. Importantly, round spermatid injection (ROSI) and delay of intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) can result in improper PN formation and subsequent developmental failure during the preimplantation stage6, suggesting the importance of parental asymmetry. However, the mechanism underlying parental asymmetry has not yet been elucidated. In addition, it is unknown whether the dynamics of the asymmetrical parental chromatin is due to an acquisition of a greater extent of histone mobility of the chromatin of the sp-mPN or decreased histone mobility in the fPN. Furthermore, the molecules involved in the regulation of the asymmetrical parental chromatin dynamics have not yet been identified. It has recently become clear that the spermatozoon also plays a role in regulating the embryonic chromatin structure. For example, sperm carry epigenetic factors responsible for the highly complex organization of the genome7–9 and DNA/histone modification and RNA in the zygote10,11, which were thought to be involved in regulating the establishment of the zygotic chromatin structure and contribute to the control of embryonic development7,11–14. In addition to the factors carried by sperm, differences in the pronuclear formation process are critical for establishing chromatin structures in the zygotes. Soon after fertilization, only the sperm genome undergoes protamine-histone replacement. This male genome-specific phenomenon possibly confers the chance to male genomes for contact by the maternally supplied factors15. Although the contribution of spermatozoa to the establishment of the zygotic chromatin structure has been widely investigated, it remains unknown not only whether the molecular properties of sperm are involved in establishing the extreme dynamics of the sp-mPN chromatin but also whether these factors are actively involved in establishing the asymmetric dynamics of the parental chromatin after fertilization. Therefore, the present study aimed to reveal the mechanisms underlying the asymmetric dynamics of the parental chromatin. The results of this study revealed that sp-mPN harbored the ability to further decrease the chromatin dynamics of the fPN, resulting in parental asymmetric chromatin dynamics. In addition to the ability of the sperm to further decrease the chromatin dynamics, our results indicated that the parental PNs compete for maternal ability to enhance the chromatin dynamics. Thus, the chromatin dynamics of the zygote are regulated by the repressive effect derived from the sperm and the enhancing effect derived from oocytes. Finally, the resultant asymmetric chromatin dynamics were involved in the parental asymmetric transcriptional regulation. Hence, the asymmetrical chromatin dynamics and gene expression in the zygotes are established by the competition between the parental PNs.