1. Introduction Natural products (NPs) are an important source of pharmaceuticals due to their diverse bioactivities [1]. Since DNA is essential for living organisms, DNA-targeting NPs, which usually function as carcinogenesis or cancer treatment, constitute an indispensable family of bioactive NPs [2,3]. Although the genotoxic metabolite colibactin, produced by human gut bacteria, is shown to cause colorectal cancer by alkylating DNA to generate DNA mutation [4,5,6], some DNA-targeting NPs are applied in chemotherapy. They can interact with specific DNA duplex structures and cause DNA damage via different modes of action [7]. One of the mechanisms is the cleavage of DNA through inducing the production of radical DNA by redox reactions or nucleophilic addition. Broad anti-cancer antibiotic bleomycin (BLM) can be transformed to HOO-Fe(III)-BLM in the presence of Fe/O2 to damage DNA [8]. The enediyne-containing NPs dynemicin A and calicheamicin can generate biradical intermediates to cleave DNA activated by reducing the quinone moiety and the attack of a thiol, respectively [9,10,11,12]. Some chemicals, such as streptozotocin, conduct the methylation of DNA [13,14]. Additionally, another family of DNA-targeting antitumor agents can alkylate DNA in situ with covalent bonds. They can directly react with DNA using highly active functional groups such as epoxide, cyclopropane, and aziridine to form bulky DNA adducts [15,16]. Furthermore, as a result of the potent cytotoxicity of DNA-alkylating NPs, it is preferable for their producers to possess resistant genes located in biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) to protect themselves. BGCs-associated self-resistance is mainly achieved through excision of the abnormal base, degradation of active functional groups, and the binding or transport of toxins [17]. The biosynthesis and resistance of radical-based DNA damage agents, including BLMs and enediynes, have already been well reviewed [18]; herein, we mainly discuss DNA-alkylating (except DNA-methylation) antitumor NPs, including their modes of action, BGC-associated self-resistance, and biosynthetic pathways, especially the construction of their highly active groups as a warhead.