1. Introduction Stroke, including hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke, is a major affliction threatening human health that has become the second most common disease in the world [1]. Ischemic stroke accounts for more than 80% of stroke occurrences and is a leading cause of mortality and disability [2]. Currently, the most effective treatment is timely thrombolysis for ischemic stroke [3]. However, at most around 8% of stroke patients eligible for recombinant tissue plasminogen activator intravenous thrombolysis receive it owing to its limited time window for treatment [4]. The reperfusion stage after cerebral ischemia is prone to cause further damage by mechanisms including free radical production, oxidative stress, excitatory amino acid toxicity, and intracellular calcium overload, which promote the release of a large number of neurotransmitters, ultimately leading to neuron damage and death [5]. Therefore, compared with thrombolytic therapy, enhancing the self-resistance and protection of neurons for ischemic stroke has broader application prospects because it has no treatment-time limitation. Mitochondria are known as the “power plants” of cells because they play a key role in maintaining cell energy homeostasis and, thus, are certainly involved in neuronal death following ischemic stroke [6]. Recent studies showed that CIR induced prominent mitochondrial dysfunction, including mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening, the damage of mitochondrial morphological, and Ca2+-mediated mitochondrial swelling to initiate neuronal death [7]. Moreover, mitochondrial dysfunction is closely related to many biological processes in the cell, such as apoptosis, oxidative stress, and inflammation in the occurrence and development of CIR. Furthermore, the accumulation of damaged mitochondria induces further brain damage, thus forming a vicious cycle [8]. Therefore, strict control of mitochondrial quality and quantity is crucial to avoid the pathological effects of dysfunctional mitochondria on neurons [9]. Failure to remove damaged mitochondria will lead to cell death, so an efficient clearance of damaged mitochondria is critical to mitigate CIR-induced nerve damage. Mitochondrial autophagy, also known as mitophagy, is a biological process by which select mitochondrial cargos are wrapped by mitochondria-derived vesicles and delivered to lysosomes for degradation, an essential process for maintaining mitochondrial contents and metabolic homeostasis [10]. Mitophagy is essential for the renewal and redistribution of mitochondria, regulating the homeostasis and biogenesis of mitochondrial, controlling the number and quality mitochondrial [11]. Increasing numbers of reports have demonstrated that mitophagy is associated with neurodegenerative diseases and brain injury [12]. Elimination of damaged mitochondria efficiently by activated mitophagy seems to be critical for neuronal survival following CIR injury [13,14,15,16,17]. Cannabinoid receptor type 1(CB1R) and cannabinoid receptor type 2 (CB2R) all are cannabinoid receptors. CB2R agonists have shown against CIR by its neuroprotective effects [18]. β-caryophyllene (BCP), a natural sesquiterpene compound found in the essential oil of plants, is reportedly a CB2R-selective agonist [19]. Previous research revealed that BCP can protect neurons against CIR injury in mice by promoting polarization of microglia toward an M2 phenotype [20]. BCP can also alleviate CIR injury by activating the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway [21]. Moreover, BCP elicited a neuroprotective effect against CIR injury by regulating neuronal death and inflammation both in vivo and in vitro [22]. However, whether the protective effects of BCP on CIR injury are mediated by regulation of mitophagy to maintain mitochondrial homeostasis and biogenesis is still largely unknown. The PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (Pink1)-Parkin (E3 ubiquitin ligase) signaling pathway is the classical regulatory mechanism for mitophagy. Pink1 is kept at a low level depending on rapid degradation by mitochondrial proteases. In the context of mitochondrial damage, Pink1 is on the outer membrane of mitochondria and recruits Parkin from cytosolic to the outer membrane of mitochondria too. Parkin mediates engulfment and subsequent destruction of mitochondria through autophagosomes when it transferred to the mitochondrial surface. Subsequently, Parkin is recognized by p62 and bound this adaptor protein. p62 recruits ubiquitinated substances into autophagosomes by binding to LC3, ultimately leading mitochondria being degraded by lysosomes. Additionally, recent evidence shows that upregulation of Pink1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy can alleviate CIR injury [17,23,24]. However, whether the Pink1/Parkin pathway is crucial for the protective effects of BCP on CIR injury is still largely unknown. Thus, our study aimed to determine whether BCP attenuates CIR-induced neuronal injury by facilitating mitophagy via the Pink1/Parkin2 signaling pathway.