1. Introduction Natural products are an invaluable source of novel chemical structures for drug development. Approximately 32% of the small molecules approved for cancer treatment are natural or naturally derived from organisms such as plants, bacteria, and marine species [1]. Natural products have been evolutionarily optimized with many sp3-hybridized carbons, chiral centers, and complex ring structures [2,3]. It is very unlikely that complex naturally occurring compounds, such as homoharringtonine, paclitaxel, and vincristine, could have emerged from a drug design program [4]. At present, there is no comprehensive explanation as to why plants contain anticancer compounds, nor is there a paradigm to offer clues on how to locate plants likely to contain anticancer compounds. This presents a challenge when deciding which plants to investigate from the more than 390,000 vascular plant species reported to inhabit Earth [5]. Two of the most commonly used approaches to select plants to study are the traditional medicine approach and the biodiversity approach. Traditional systems of medicine, such as Ayurveda, Unani, Kampo, and traditional Chinese medicine, have thrived for thousands of years and have provided valuable insights, leading to the discovery of new treatments for many ailments [6,7,8]. Traditional medicine has been more helpful in identifying treatments for conditions such as malaria that present symptoms such as fever, nausea, and vomiting; that are identifiable before treatment; and that disappear following successful treatment [9]. Unfortunately, the link between anticancer therapies and the traditional use of their source plants is not as clear as in other diseases. In what has been described as monumental work, Jonathan Hartwell’s book, titled Plants Used Against Cancer (1982), including extended work (2000), contains documentation, personal testimony, and traditional uses for over 3000 plant species that have been reported for treating cancer [10,11]. However, with the exception of etoposide and teniposide [12], there are no clinically used drugs available for cancer treatment that have directly emerged from, or have been significantly linked to, this compilation. One proposed explanation is that the term “cancer” is poorly defined in these accounts, or is only loosely associated with visible or tangible conditions such as warts, polyps, tumors, etc. [12]. The diagnosis and treatment of cancer requires sophisticated techniques that go beyond visible and tangible inspection, such as magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, positron emission tomography, or blood sample analysis [13,14,15]. These techniques are not available to traditional healers, making the traditional medicine approach a largely unreliable method for selecting anticancer plants. The biodiversity approach has been the most successful collection method for finding anticancer compounds with clinical relevance, such as paclitaxel, camptothecin, podophyllotoxin, and the vinca alkaloids [16,17,18,19]. This process begins with the randomized collection of plants, followed by the use of standard extraction procedures [20]. Multiple cycles of activity-guided fractionation are performed using cancer bioassays until a compound with cytotoxic activity is identified. This randomized approach is notorious for producing a low yield of promising agents when compared with approaches based on the screening of synthetic compound libraries. Therefore, it is often performed on a large scale, which makes the process costly, time-consuming, and environmentally harmful, since large amounts of waste solvent are generated [4,21]. As an addition to the current approaches, we propose that the discovery of anticancer compounds could be expedited by using an ecological approach. This approach is based on the hypothesis that anticancer compounds are primarily present in plants to provide them with an ecological advantage by interfering with the signaling or metabolic pathways of competing species. This approach has various strengths that facilitate the search for anticancer compounds in a much more rational, systematic way. Plants are stationary and cannot escape their environments. This leaves them susceptible to herbivores, bacteria, viruses, fungi, and competitor plants present in the immediate vicinity. Plants must also retain the ability to survive variable environmental pressures such as radiation, water loss, heat, salinity, and nutrient deprivation [22,23]. Despite lacking sophisticated immune systems, plants have been quite successful at surviving these conditions. It has been noted that plants accumulate many secondary metabolites [24]. Secondary metabolites are not essential for growth, development, or reproduction, but are released by plants under different conditions and by different processes. They enter the soil through root exudation, decomposition of leaf and root tissue, and as trichome leachates [25]. Many secondary metabolites alter the germination, growth, and reproduction of neighboring plants by interacting with and altering critical cellular processes. The ability of a plant species to chemically inhibit a neighboring plant through the release of such secondary metabolites is called allelopathy [26,27]. The accumulation and release of these allelopathic secondary metabolites, called allelochemicals, may influence their survival, the dominance and succession of plants, community formation, the biodiversity of a region, and crop production [24,26,28]. Allelochemicals, which have a major role in chemical defense, must have a level of inherent bioavailability to successfully leave the donor plant, travel through the soil, and enter the receiving plant [29]. Although allelopathy is a process common to plants, it has been argued that allelopathy is more effective when and where plants are experiencing stress [30,31]. Notably, the concentrations of various clinically useful anticancer compounds in plants increase when the plant experiences some form of moderate stress. This has been reported for camptothecin [32], paclitaxel [33], vinblastine [34], podophyllotoxin [35], and several sesquiterpene lactones with known cytotoxic properties [36,37,38,39,40,41]. Identifying plants containing compounds that inhibit or interfere with the development of other plant species may increase the likelihood of discovering compounds with anticancer activity in a time- and cost-effective manner. To test this hypothesis, four species were selected: Magnolia grandiflora L, Gynoxys verrucosa Wedd., Picradeniopsis oppositifolia (Nutt.) Rydb. ex Britton, and Hedyosmum racemosum (Ruiz & Pav.) G. Don. These plant species have been reported to contain compounds with activity against cancer cell lines [42,43,44,45]. They are from three unrelated plant families (Magnoliaceae, Asteraceae, and Chloranthaceae), they grow in different plant habitats, and were available in sufficient amounts from previous collections. The presence of compounds that inhibit or interfere with the development of other plant species on the extracts of the test plants was investigated using seeds of Lolium perenne L. ssp. multiflorum (Lam.) Husnota, a representative monocot, and Lactuca sativa L., a representative dicot. The use of plant seeds has several advantages over standard cytotoxicity assays with cell lines. Seeds are multicellular eukaryotic test systems that experience spatial and temporal changes in their cellular development. The seeds of these plants germinate uniformly and rapidly, and are commonly used for allelopathy studies [46,47,48]. The inhibitory effects of the extracts and compounds 1–5 (Figure 1) isolated from the extracts were contrasted and correlated with their antileukemic activity using MV4-11 (acute myeloid leukemia, AML) cells.