1. Introduction Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is considered one of the 10 main threats to public health that humanity currently faces [1,2]. A microorganism that is resistant to at least one agent of three or more classes of antimicrobials is defined as multidrug-resistant (MDR) [3]. MDR pathogens cause infections refractory to antimicrobials, which limit the therapeutic options, and consequently result in worsening of the clinical condition of the patient, prolonged hospital stays with intensive care, and a high fatality rate [2,4]. The rapid spread of multidrug-resistant bacteria (MDR) has caused a global alert [4,5]. It is estimated that approximately 700,000 deaths from infections per year are caused by antibiotic-resistant strains, with an expected increase to 10 million in 2050 [6]. Given this scenario, a joint tripartite secretariat composed of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE), and the World Health Organization (WHO) was established to propose actions and goals for the control of AMR. Since 2015, this subject has been addressed in a more specific way, with the purpose of increasing awareness of antimicrobial resistance, and delaying the development and dissemination of resistant microorganisms. For a long time, infections caused by MDR microorganisms were associated almost exclusively with hospital environments and nosocomial infections. However, it is now known that antimicrobial resistance is a problem that also encompasses the food production chain and can affect, in addition to risk groups, the general population [7,8]. Zoonotic MDR bacteria can be selected through the widespread or indiscriminate use of antibiotics in production animals. Vegetables and fresh products may also have contact with MDR microorganisms in the field through soil, water, or contaminated compounds. These microorganisms can also be transmitted by food handlers, facilities, equipment, and tools throughout the supply chain [9,10,11,12,13]. Several outbreaks involving food and MDR microorganisms have been reported in recent years, corroborating the need for greater attention being paid to these pathogens in the food production chain [14,15,16,17]. In 2014, an outbreak involving Salmonella Heidelberg in mechanically separated meat (MSM) from poultry was reported in the USA, in which 67% of the isolates identified were MDR [18,19]. In 2017, Salmonella isolates from an outbreak linked to papaya showed resistance to streptomycin and tetracycline [20]. In 2018, an outbreak caused by S. Reading in turkey meat resulted in 358 cases and one death; 64% of the isolates had antimicrobial resistance genes [21]. Furthermore, in Europe, high to extremely high levels of resistance to ciprofloxacin, nalidixic acid, and tetracycline were observed in isolates of Campylobacter sp. Outbreaks involving methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) associated with chicken, turkey, beef, and/or pork meat have also been reported in Austria, Germany, the Netherlands, and Switzerland [22]. Another aggravating factor in the presence of these microorganisms in the food chain is the transmissibility of resistance genes in humans [23]. The transfer of antibiotic-resistance genes can occur in the intestine through the consumption of contaminated food [18]. Cabello [24] reported that the accumulation of resistant bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract may transform humans into a “bank of antibiotic resistance genes”. In addition, some studies have shown that zoonotic MDR bacteria can be easily transmitted to humans through food [25,26]. There is evidence of the transmission of mobile genetic determinants (plasmids, transposons, and cassettes of genes in integrons) in resistant pathogens from birds to humans [4]. Furthermore, some microorganisms have the ability to grow and form communities on biotic or abiotic surfaces [27,28]. These clusters of macromolecules and microorganisms are called biofilms. They are formed by bacteria, diatoms, fungi, and protozoa, and are immersed in an extracellular matrix (EPS) composed of polysaccharides, proteins, and exogenous DNA [29,30,31]. Biofilms confer advantages to cells as a survival strategy and adaptation to a variety of stresses. It is estimated that approximately 80% of bacterial infections are related to biofilms [32]. Biofilms resistant to antimicrobials are a significant issue for public health and food production chain. The recalcitrance of biofilms, a phenomenon that encompasses tolerance and resistance, confers to microbial communities the ability to survive and resistance to bactericidal agents [11,33]. Tolerance is more directly related to the characteristics of the EPS matrix and the physiological state of cells, whereas antimicrobial resistance refers to different mechanisms, such as extracellular signaling and horizontal gene transfer (HGT) [11,34,35,36]. Studies have suggested a possible correlation between antimicrobial resistance and biofilm formation capacity [37,38,39]. In addition, the patterns of resistance to multiple drugs presented by biofilms point to the need for a better understanding of the recalcitrance mechanisms [34]. Thus, the aim of this review is to present the main mechanisms of tolerance and resistance of MDR biofilms and their occurrence in the food production chain.