INTRODUCTION Antibiotics are secondary metabolites (SMs) produced by certain bacteria and fungi, which are not required for growth, development, or reproduction, but may provide an advantage in competition for nutrients or defense against predators in natural environments. Genes encoding enzymes for the biosynthesis of SMs are usually colocalized in the genome and form so-called “biosynthetic gene clusters” (BGCs). Typical BGCs contain “core” genes responsible for the biosynthesis of a molecular scaffold, accessory genes encoding enzymes for scaffold modification, genes that regulate the BGC’s expression, and resistance genes for self-protection against the endogenously produced compound (1). Actinomycetes, filamentous Gram-positive bacteria of the phylum Actinobacteria, produce thousands of SMs, including ca 50% of all clinically used antibiotics (2). Actinomycetes protect themselves from the toxic effects of endogenously produced antibiotics using a variety of specific mechanisms (3). For example, the ErmE protein of the erythromycin producer Saccharopolyspora erythraea catalyzes methylation of 23S rRNA, thus preventing binding of erythromycin to the ribosome and inhibiting protein synthesis (4). The tetracycline producer Streptomyces rimosus encodes, within the tetracycline BGC, a transmembrane protein channel that pumps the antibiotic out of the cells by coupling antibiotic excretion with proton import (5, 6). Other prevalent examples of resistance mechanisms are the direct enzymatic modification of antibiotics via hydrolysis or transfer of a specific chemical group that prevents an antibiotic from binding to its target. Despite the structural diversity of antibiotics, two modes of the latter modification predominate: N-acetylation of amino groups and O-phosphorylation of hydroxyl groups, for which the donor cofactors are acyl coenzyme A (acyl-CoA) and ATP, respectively (6). N-Acetylation of amino groups is catalyzed by GNAT enzymes (Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferases), most of which use acetyl-CoA as a cosubstrate (7). However, GNAT proteins exist that prefer different acyl donors, such as myristoyl-CoA in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (8) or succinyl-CoA in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (9). The latter protein was shown to both acylate and succinylate mycobacterial nucleoid-associated protein HU (10). The involvement of N-acetyltransferases in antibiotic resistance first was shown in the kanamycin producer Streptomyces kanamyceticus, which possesses an aminoglycoside N-acetyltransferase (AAC) activity (11). The aac gene (new designation kanM) encoding the AAC enzyme has been cloned in Streptomyces
lividans, where it functioned as a resistance determinant against kanamycin (12, 13). Except for the aforementioned KanM enzyme from S. kanamyceticus, not much information is available about the AAC proteins from Streptomyces. Here, we describe the characterization of a GNAT-like protein, CsbC, encoded by a BGC for a cryptic siderophore in the newly isolated strain Streptomyces YIM 121038. We demonstrate N-succinyltransferase activity of CsbC on a range of structurally distinct antibiotics, some of which completely lose their activity due to such modification. The latter suggests that proteins similar to CsbC may contribute to antibiotic resistance in nature, providing an additional line of defense against competitors capable of antibiotic biosynthesis.