1. Introduction Bacteria compete with other microorganisms in their ecological niches for nutrients and other biotic and abiotic resources, and many have developed mechanisms enabling them to outcompete their rival congeners. One of these is the production of bacteriocins, which are ribosomally synthesized antimicrobial peptides [1,2,3] produced by Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, as well as by Archaea [1,4]. Bacteriocins produced by Gram-positive bacteria are currently the most studied, particularly the bacteriocins produced by lactic acid bacteria (designated as LAB-bacteriocins). Usually, LAB-bacteriocins possess narrow spectra and therefore are active against phylogenetically close bacteria. Nonetheless, some LAB-bacteriocins can target phylogenetically distant bacteria [5]. Bacteriocins are synthesized as precursor peptides, in which the core peptide is preceded by an N-terminal leader peptide. These precursor peptides are known to be inactive and must be stripped of their leader peptide to produce the active form of the bacteriocin [6]. Some of these bacteriocins can undergo enzymatic post-translational modifications (PTM), leading to post-translationally modified peptides (RiPPs) [7]. Accordingly, bacteriocins can be classified into two main classes: class I, containing RiPPs; and class II, containing unmodified bacteriocins [8]. These bacteriocins are low-molecular-weight (<10 kDa) thermostable peptides. There is also a third class of high-molecular-weight, thermolabile bacteriocins [9,10]. However, there is a relatively small number of bacteriocins that are synthesized without a leader peptide and are therefore active after their translation in the cytoplasm [11]. These leaderless bacteriocins (LLB) were discovered by Cintas and co-workers following the characterization of an enterococcal bacteriocin named L50 [12]. As can be predicted from the considerable number of genes constituting the genetic determinants of bacteriocins, their synthesis requires a mechanism involving modification, transport, and immunity proteins and in some cases additional accessory proteins [13]. Genes coding for bacteriocins are generally organized as operons, located either on plasmids or in the chromosome, and their expressions are usually co-regulated [13]. The transport of these bacteriocins is most often mediated by an ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter system [14] and in some cases by a secretory pathway [15]. The transport of leaderless bacteriocins is not yet fully understood. A first study conducted on aureocin 70 showed the involvement of an ABC type transporter named AurT, which is responsible of the externalization of the LLB aureocin A70 [16], while NisT is the main transporter for nisin [17]. The ABC transporter can help mature the bacteriocin by cleaving the leader peptide, or it may be carried out with the participation of an associated protein [6,14]. Bacteriocin-producing bacteria are protected against the toxicity of their own products by immunity mechanisms [18]. Most of them, as well as many bacteriocin’s mode of action, are not well understood. Nevertheless, some mechanisms have been characterized and can be mediated by specific proteins, such as that of the enterocin CRL35, where its immunity protein interacts with the forming pore, blocking it [19] or that of nisin, where a NisI protein anchored to the extracellular membrane is able to hijack nisin molecules [20]. Another mechanism involves the abovementioned ABC transporter that basically expels the surrounding bacteriocin across the membrane. This is the case of NisEFG for nisin [21], or As-48EFGH for the cyclic enterocin AS-48 [22]. EntDD14 is a leaderless bacteriocin composed of two highly related peptides [23], which is produced by Enterococcus faecalis 14, a strain previously isolated from meconium [24]. Recently, we have demonstrated that the EntDD14 transport system is mediated by an ABC transporter system [25] and, more importantly, by two proteins, DdE and DdF, carrying pleckstrin homology domains (PHb2) [26]. These findings related to EntDD14 transport were unexpected and suggested a mode of transport different from those described to date. To gain more insight on the EntDD14 transport systems, we compiled a collection of mutants of the genes which we assumed to have a role in the transport and assessed their activity against Listeria innocua as the indicator organism to evaluate the externalization of this bacteriocin by different combinations of transport systems. In this work, we provide more information on the transport of EntDD14, through genetic evidence based on the construction of several mutant strains. We show that partial or total deletion of the ABC transport system does not completely abolish the transport and externalization of the bacteriocin to the extracellular medium. It is clear that the transport of the leaderless bacteriocin EntDD14 is strongly dependent on proteins DdE and DdF.