1. Introduction Natural products are small chemical compounds derived from secondary metabolites of animals, plants, and microorganisms with an array of biological activities. Since the discovery and clinical use of penicillin and streptomycin [1,2], natural products have been an important source of drugs and play a critical role in modern medicine and agricultural industries [2]. However, widespread use and misuse of these small chemical compounds has led to the rising emergence of antibiotic resistance, resulting in the gradual loss of efficacy of antibiotics in clinic and natural environment. Antibiotic resistance has become one of the greatest public health threats that humans will have to face in the coming decades [3,4]. According to a report from the UK government, the death toll caused by antibiotic resistance is estimated to be up to 10 million per year by 2050, with a cost of drug resistance to $100 trillion [5]. Therefore, there is an urgent need for uncovering the resistance mechanisms in pathogens and developing new compounds with novel modes of action [6,7,8]. Generally, the clinical antibiotic resistance in human pathogens belongs to acquired resistance, with only a small fraction under the category of innate resistance. The origins of these acquired resistance genes have been traced to antibiotic-producers in natural environments [9,10]. In antibiotic-producing microbes, self-resistance is a prerequisite for the synthesis of antibiotics [11]. Antibiotic biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) contain one or more resistance genes to achieve self-protection, and these genes are considered to be the reservoirs of resistance genes, which may transfer to human pathogens by conjugation, transformation or transduction [9,10,12,13]. Consequently, the elucidation of self-resistance mechanisms from antibiotic-producing microbes will not only reveal the action model of antibiotics and guide the discovery of new natural products, but also provide key clues for the studies of clinical antibiotic resistance [8,10,13,14]. To avoid suicide, antibiotic-producers have developed several mechanisms, including efflux pumps, chemical modification, prodrugs, compound sequestration, (sub)cellular location, target modification, and damage repair to shield the toxicity of antibiotics, thereby achieving self-protection [6]. Different strategies are adapted depending on the structure of antibiotics, molecular target and producer species [8]. For instance, within the enediyne producers, apoproteins are known to afford self-protection to the producers by binding the nine-membered enediyne chromophore, whereas the strategies of chemical modification guided by self-sacrifice proteins and sequestration mediated by drug binding proteins are utilized for the detoxification of ten-membered enediynes [15,16]. To prevent self-harm from bleomycin, its producer Steptomyces verticillus employs bleomycin N-acetylation and sequestration mechanisms to protect itself. The antitumor agent mitomycin C producer, Steptomyces lavendulae, has developed several mechanisms, including prodrug, efflux pump, drug sequestration, and reoxidation of the active reduced mitomycin C to ensure self-resistance [15]. With sustained advances in the study of self-resistance mechanisms, researchers have found that the assembly of antibiotics and self-resistance do not always occur at the same cellular location. In some cases, self-resistance is achieved through enzymatic reaction occurring at different timing and location [17,18,19]. Although the self-protection mechanisms in antibiotic-producing microbes and application of self-resistance genes in natural product mining have been described in previous reviews [6], the topic of self-resistance in microbes that synthesized final active drugs at different cell locations has never before been reviewed in its entirety. In addition, self-resistance genes that widely prevalent in nature were not described in previous reviews. Therefore, this contribution will provide an overview of newly-discovered self-resistance enzymes for natural products functional at different cell locations, explore the models of resistance strategies involved, describe those resistance determinants that are widespread in nature and the applications in natural product mining, and interrogate the landscape of self-resistance genes in combating drug resistance and future applications in new drug discovery. The self-resistance genes were selected as the keywords for the search in Google Scholar from 2016 to 2022. In this review, we focus on new representative examples (Figure 1) of self-resistance mechanisms of bioactive natural products, aiming to provide a perspective on the ties between toxic antibiotics and self-resistance from timing and location. We present two models of self-resistance strategies: temporal-spatial shielding and non-spatial shielding–intracellular multi-level resistance. As for the intracellular multi-level resistance model, both of the enzymatic reactions catalyzed by resistance proteins and the assembly of toxic natural products occur inside cells. Instead, in the temporal-spatial shielding model, the final toxic compounds are produced extracellularly by secreted proteins, and self-resistance is achieved through enzymatic reactions occurring at different timing and location. Moreover, we also highlight those resistance determinants that are widely spread in bacteria and describe examples of the use of self-resistance genes to guide the discovery of new natural products. Taken together, we expect to provide some new insight on the role of resistance genes in natural product biosynthesis and in response to clinical resistance.