Introduction Wolfberry (Lycium barbarum L) is gradually becoming one of the most popular functional fruits worldwide as it is rich in nutrients and phytochemicals (Wenli et al., 2021). Wolfberry has anticancer, antioxidant, antiaging, blood sugar control, and immune-enhancing properties. Therefore, this fruit is widely used in food and medicine fields (Zhou et al., 2017; Yajun et al., 2019). However, wolfberry fruit is highly perishable because of its susceptibility to various postharvest pathogenic diseases. Fungal diseases are the main cause of postharvest losses of wolfberry fruits. Particularly, Alternaria sp. are the most common postharvest pathogenic fungi of wolfberry fruits and can significantly reduce the fruit value and shelf life, causing severe economic losses (Yuan et al., 2012; Wei et al., 2017). Regarding postharvest diseases of fruits, traditional physical methods can delay senescence but cannot completely prevent rot, which ultimately reduces fruit quality (Alijani et al., 2019). On the other hand, chemical fungicides have a substantial inhibitory effect on pathogenic fungi, but their long-term and large-scale use leads to deposition of residues in the environment and resistance of pathogenic fungi (Mari et al., 2016). Therefore, finding new, safe, efficient, and environmentally friendly methods for controlling these diseases is of great significance. Increasing number of researchers have recently focused on biological control agents (BCAs; Do Kim et al., 2020). According to research, many bacteria can produce volatile organic compounds (VOCs) with antifungal function, which have shown strong inhibitory effects on fungal diseases (Di Francesco et al., 2020a). Gotor-Vila et al. (2017) reported that VOCs produced by Bacillus amyloliquefaciens CPA-8 significantly inhibited the mycelial growth of postharvest pathogens and reduced the rot of cherry fruits. Arrarte et al. (2017) revealed that VOCs released by Candida sake can control decay of apples caused by postharvest pathogens. Similarly, Oro et al. (2018) found that VOCs from Wickerhamomyces anomalus, Metschnikowia pulcherrima, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae can inhibit pathogenic fungi that cause rot in strawberries and control postharvest diseases. In this way, VOCs released by BCAs provide a new solution for the prevention and treatment of postharvest diseases. VOCs have the characteristics of strong permeability and high diffusion efficiency, and are easy degradation, can greatly reduce residues. In a relatively closed environment, a full range of biological fumigation can be performed on items to achieve better results (Qin et al., 2017; Toffano et al., 2017). Therefore, compared with chemical fungicides, the mode of action of VOCs produced by BCAs is safer and more efficient. B. velezensis has been widely studied because of its highly effective inhibitory effect on pathogenic microorganisms. Li et al. (2020) reported that VOCs from B. velezensis CT32 could inhibit strawberry vascular wilt pathogens Verticillium dahliae and Fusarium oxysporum. Gao et al. (2017) indicated that VOCs emitted by B. velezensis ZSY-1 could inhibit A. solani and Botrytis cinerea. Calvo et al. (2020) showed that VOCs produced by B. velezensis strains BUZ-14, I3 and I5 could inhibit postharvest fungal pathogens of fruits, thereby reducing the disease severity in grapes and apricots. B. velezensis is considered a promising BCA against postharvest fungal diseases. Currently, research on postharvest preservation of wolfberry fresh fruit fruits is lacking. Therefore, this study evaluated the in vivo and in vitro effects of VOCs produced by B. velezensis L1 and individual pure substance against postharvest pathogenic fungi A. iridiaustralis in wolfberry fruit.