1. Introduction Acinetobacter baumannii (A. baumannii) is one of the primary microorganisms linked to hospital-acquired infections such as central line-associated bacteraemia, ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), as well as meningitis, bioprosthetic tricuspid valve endocarditis, and urinary tract infections (UTIs) [1]. The global estimated incidence rate of A. baumannii infections is approximately 1 million cases annually, with crude mortality rates ranging from 20 to 80% [2,3]. Previous studies have indicated that several risk factors predispose patients to A. baumannii infection including age (premature babies), immunosuppression, prior hospitalisation [exposure to intensive care unit (ICU)], hospitalisation duration, surgery (invasive procedures), presence of medical indwelling devices (intravascular catheters, urinary catheter, or drainage tubes), and prior or inappropriate antimicrobial therapy [4]. Moreover, the extensive resistome of A. baumannii hampers the efficacy of mono-therapeutic options, and while antibiotic combination therapies have been shown to exhibit in vitro and in vivo activity against various antibiotic-resistant strains, clinical trials have not provided sufficient data to confirm that combination therapies are superior for the treatment of A. baumannii infections [5]. In addition, A. baumannii’s virulome, including cellular envelope factors, outer membrane proteins, secretion systems, phospholipases, as well as biofilm formation, allows it to persist under unfavourable environmental conditions for extended time periods, enhancing the colonisation and subsequent infection of susceptible hosts [6]. There is thus an urgent need for the research and development of alternative or novel approaches that could be used for the treatment of A. baumannii-associated infections, with biological control therapeutic options, defined as the elimination or eradication of a population of microorganisms through the introduction of an antagonistic (predatory) microorganism or its associated secondary metabolites, garnering increased interest [7]. For example, microbially derived secondary metabolites such as biosurfactants have been described as alternative or novel antimicrobials due to their functional properties. Lipopeptides and glycolipids are of extreme interest to the pharmaceutical and medical industry as various classes exhibit broad-spectrum in vitro and in vivo antimicrobial, antibiofilm, antiadhesive activity, and low cytotoxicity [8,9,10]. While the biosurfactants exhibit promising functional properties as biological control agents against A. baumannii, the application thereof remains limited due to the potential development of resistance and the high cost associated with commercialisation or large-scale (up-scaling) production [11,12,13]. In addition, biological control agents including predatory bacteria [Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus (B. bacteriovorus)] and bacteriophages have been investigated as alternative or novel antimicrobials as these approaches are considered self-sustaining, highly specific, and result in low resistance frequencies, highlighting their potential use against A. baumannii [14,15]. However, while the biological control agents have been observed to exhibit in vitro and in vivo antimicrobial, and antibiofilm activity with limited cytotoxicity (or deleterious effects) following treatment, the potential of developing resistance and environmental stability, are major limitations impeding their potential application against A. baumannii. The current review will thus provide a brief overview of A. baumannii’s environmental persistence (bacterial survival under unfavourable environmental conditions), and antibiotic resistance strategies, primarily facilitated through virulence factors and antibiotic resistance mechanisms [16]. In addition, the therapeutic potential of microbial secondary metabolites [biosurfactants (lipopeptides and glycolipids)] as well as biological control agents including predatory bacteria (B. bacteriovorus) and bacteriophages will be discussed in terms of their in vitro and in vivo activity, limitations such as the potential development of resistance, product stabilisation and large-scale (up-scaling) production. Correspondingly, potential mitigation strategies will focus on the methods to curtail resistance development during treatment (combination therapy with commercial antibiotics), product (B. bacteriovorus and bacteriophage-derived enzymes) stabilisation for application in the medical/pharmaceutical industries, and large-scale production and optimisation of the biological control agents or their derived products.