Results Drought treatment From the onset of drought symptoms, non-inoculated plants exhibited either wilted shoot tips or complete collapse. In order to investigate the impact of virus infection on plant growth and the development of drought symptoms, we compared virus-infected and mock-inoculated tomato cultivars under prolonged drought conditions. The growth rate of virus-susceptible tomatoes was significantly reduced as a result of viral infection. After 15 to 25 days of growth, plants in the virus-infected (VW) group exhibited smaller sizes compared to the healthy (HW) group. It is important to note that the growth of drought-exposed tomatoes in the healthy (HD) group was also restricted. Drought symptoms became apparent in tomatoes of the virus-infected (VD) and healthy (HD) groups after 10 days of drought treatment. However, by day 25, the tomatoes in the HD group had completely wilted and collapsed, unlike the VD group where only clear wilting was observed. Remarkably, the growth inhibition in the VD group plants was significantly delayed compared to the HD group plants. Even after an extended drought period of 20–25 days, no complete destruction of tomato plants was observed in the VD group. TYLCV and ToCV grafting confirmation with Duplex and nested PCR After extracting total DNA from MK and SH tomato samples, the duplex PCR method was employed to identify TYLCV in the tomato plants. The samples exhibited bands at 462 bp on an agarose gel when primer triplets (AC950, AV632, and AC1048) were used. The healthy tomato leaf sample, mock-inoculated sample, and negative control (dH2O) did not display any bands. In contrast, the positive control obtained from infected tomato samples from Antalya exhibited a specific TYLCV band at 462 bp (Fig. 4B). To detect ToCV, total RNA was isolated from MK and SH tomato samples, and the presence of ToCV was determined using the two-step nested RT-PCR method. Following the nested RT-PCR, a 463 bp fragment of the HSP70 gene was amplified from the positive control sample (Fig. 4A). Quantitative (qRT-PCR) expression analysis of cellulose synthase genes (CesA/Csl) To investigate the involvement of CesA/Csl genes in the response to combined virus and drought stress in tomato cultivars, gene expression analysis was conducted. The transcript levels of CesA and Csl genes exhibited an increase under virus and drought stress conditions, and the extent of this increase varied among different species (Fig. 5). In the qRT-PCR analyses of the four studied genes (Csl-H1, Csl-D3,1, Csl-D3,2, and Ces-A2), an overall upregulation pattern was observed in both tomato cultivars (MK and SH). Notably, among these genes, Csl-H1 showed relatively lower levels of upregulation or downregulation compared to the other genes when subjected to virus and drought stress on days 1 and 25. It is worth mentioning that the expression of the Csl-H1 gene displayed less variation compared to other CesA/Csl genes in terms of both virus (TYLCV and ToCV) and drought stress. TYLCV and ToCV virus-infected cultivars When only TYLCV and ToCV virus-infected (without drought stress application) samples were compared; Significant gene expression differences were determined between day 1 and day 25 in both Money Maker (MK, UK) and Shalala (SH, Azerbaijan) cultivars, especially in TYLCV-infected genotypes. In the Shalala cultivar (SWT), an approximately 3-fold increase in gene expression was observed in the Csl-D3,2 between the 1st day (12 fold change) and the 25th day (31 fold change), approximately 7-fold in the Csl-D3,1 and approximately 4.5-fold in the Ces-A2, respectively (Fig. 5). Unlike the TYLCV-infected samples, there is no significant difference in the expression increase in the ToCV virus-infected samples, especially in the Money Maker cultivar (MWO), when comparing the Csl-D3,1, Csl-D3,2, and Ces-A2 genes between day 1 and 25. In the ToCV virus-infected Shalala cultivar (SWO), between the 1st and the 25th day, approximately 40 and 6.5-fold increase in gene expression was observed, especially in Csl-D3,1 and Csl-D3,2 genes, respectively (Fig, 5). When evaluated from this point of view, the fact that there are more gene expression changes (between 1st and 25th days) in the ToCV virus-infected Shalala cultivar compared to the Money Maker reveals that the Shalala cultivar may be more sensitive to this virus. TYLCV and ToCV virus-infected and drought-stressed cultivars When we look at the samples infected with the virus (TYLCV and ToCV) and also subjected to drought stress, the highest gene expression increase was detected in the Shalala (SDT) (314 fold change) in the Csl-D3,1 gene. Interestingly, the Money Maker (MDT) genotype, which showed a 4 fold change, upregulation in the Csl-H1 gene on day 1, manifested a 7.5 fold change, downregulation on day 25. According to the results of the analysis, drought stress applications in virus-infected SDO and SDT genotypes, especially in Csl-D3,1, Csl-D3,2 and Ces-A2 genes, significantly increased gene expression levels on the 25 day of drought stress. For example, a 3-fold change, upregulation occurred in the Csl-D3,1 gene on the 1st day of drought-stress treatment in the SDO genotype, while the same genotype had a 96 fold change, upregulation on the 25th day of drought stress. There is a different situation in the Money Maker cultivar. In the Csl-D3,1 gene, there was no significant change in the comparison of virus-infected Money Maker (MDT and MDO) on the 1st day of drought stress with the 25th day of drought stress, and gene expression coefficients were similar. Similarly, in the Csl-D3,2 no significant increase or decrease in gene expression was observed on the 25th day compared to the 1st-day results. For example, the Money Maker (MDO) plants in the Csl-D3,2 gene had 28 fold change, upregulation, while on day 25 there was 8 fold change, upregulation. Physiological measurements of tomatoes subjected to virus and drought stresses In the MK and Shalala cultivars, there was an increase in RWC in leaves infected with TYLCV and ToCV compared to mock-inoculated samples. However, RWC in the combined infection of TYLCV and drought (VD) was lower compared to the combined infection of TYLCV and drought (VH). When drought stress was applied to TYLCV-inoculated MK cultivars, the RWC in leaves of the drought treatment group (HD) decreased by 11% compared to the well-watered group (HW), and in the drought treatment and virus-infection group (VW), RWC decreased by 14%. Although the RWC increased by 8–11% in the VD group compared to the other TYLCV and drought-stressed groups, respectively, it dropped by 3% compared to the HW group. Similar results were observed in plants exposed to the combined effect of ToCV and drought, with the RWC in the HD and VW groups showing a reduction of 14% and 12%, respectively, compared to the HW group. In contrast, the VD group showed a 4% increase in RWC. In the Shalala genotype, the RWC percentage changed in response to the dual effects of TYLCV and drought, with RWC values of 64% in the well-watered (HW) group, 56% in the drought treatment (HD) group, 52% in the drought treatment and VW group, and 59% in the drought treatment and combined virus-infection (VD) group. After exposing tomato samples grafted with ToCV to drought stress, the RWC expression decreased by 65% in the well-watered (HW) samples, and 53–51% in the HD and VW groups, respectively. In the VD group, compared to the other stressed groups, there was an increase, with an RWC value of 60% (Fig. 6). During the experiments, the dry biomass percentage of tomato samples belonging to the MK and SH cultivars was measured following the procedure outlined in the Materials and Methods section. In plants exposed to the dual effect of TYLCV and drought, there was an approximately 11% reduction in leaf dry biomass in the HD group compared to the HW group. The biomass of the VW group was approximately half (23%) of that of the HW group. The VD group showed a 14% reduction, representing a ~1.6 times reduction compared to the VW and HD groups. In samples inoculated with ToCV, compared to the HW group, the dry biomass increased 2 times, reaching 24% in the HD group. The dry biomass percentage in the VW samples was 21%. Compared to the mock-inoculated group, there was a decrease of up to 17% in the ToCV + drought variants, with a slight increase of up to 3% compared to the control variant. In the Shalala genotype, the values of dry biomass in plants exposed to the combined effects of the viruses (TYLCV and ToCV) and drought were 12% and 17%, respectively. In mock-inoculated plants, there was an increase of up to 19% and 23% in the HD samples, and up to 17% and 14% in the VW samples. Only slight increases of 2% and 4% were observed in the VD group compared to the HW group, indicating a minimal increase compared to the control variant (Fig. 7). Water deficit was examined in both cultivars. An increase in water deficit was observed in the VD samples compared to the HW samples, while a significant reduction was detected in the VW samples compared to the VD samples. In the MK cultivar, the water deficit in mock-inoculated leaves was 9%. This index increased to 16% and 20% in the HD group, and to 18% (TYLCV) and 19% (ToCV) in the VW group. In the VD group, water deficit was 13% and 15%, representing 4% and 6% increases compared to the HW group. In the Shalala cultivar, the water content of the HW samples was approximately 8%. There were increases of 13% and 11% in the HD variant compared to the control (HW), and 14% (TYLCV) and 6% (ToCV) in the VW variant of tomato leaves. Compared to the control variant, there was a 4% increase in the TYLCV + drought (VD) variant and a 3% increase in the ToCV + drought (VD) variant in plant leaves exposed to dual stress (Fig. 8). In both cultivars, an increase in leaf area was observed in the VW samples compared to the HW samples, while a decrease was observed in the VD samples compared to the VW samples. However, the decrease in leaf area in the VD samples was quite insignificant compared to the other groups of plants (HD, VW). In the MK cultivar, the leaf area was 22 cm2 in the HW group, and 30 cm2 in the HD group, 3 cm2 (TYLCV) and 10 cm2 (ToCV) in the VW group, representing a reduction of approximately 20 cm2 for the HD group and approximately 16 cm2 for the VW group compared to the leaf area of mock-inoculated plants. In the VD group, the leaf area showed a decrease of up to 4 cm2 for both viruses. In the Shalala cultivar, the leaf area changed as follows: 31 cm2 and 29 cm2 in the HW group, 16 cm2 and 18 cm2 in the HD group, 19 cm2 (TYLCV) and 27 cm2 (ToCV) in the VW groups, and 27 cm2 (TYLCV) and 21 cm2 (ToCV) in the VD groups. The reduction in leaf area in the VD leaf samples was minimal compared to the other groups of plants (HD, VW) (Fig. 9).