RESULTS Identification of zeamine resistance genes in D. oryzae To identify zeamine resistance genes in D. oryzae EC1, its zeamine‐minus mutant ∆zmsA was mutated with the mariner‐based transposon carried by pBT20 (Seet & Zhang, 2011). Mutant ∆zmsA was chosen for transposon mutagenesis to eliminate a putative toxic effect of the self‐produced zeamines on the growth of transposon insertional mutants that are sensitive to zeamines. The resultant library was screened for mutants with altered sensitivity to zeamines. After screening about 11,800 transposon insertional mutants, nine mutants designated as Zs1–Zs9 showing higher levels of zeamine sensitivity than the parental strain ∆zmsA were obtained. The flanking regions adjacent to the insertion sites were amplified by fusion primer and nested integrated PCR (FPNI‐PCR; Wang et al., 2011) and sequenced for BLASTn analysis to localize the insertion sites. The results showed that the mutants Zs1–Zs9 harbour transposon insertions within a putative seven‐gene operon (Figure 1a, Table S1), which shows over 88% similarity at the nucleotide level to the previously characterized arn operon of D. dadantii 3937 (Costechareyre et al., 2013). This putative operon was hence named the arn
EC1 operon (Figure 1a) and selected for subsequent analysis. Two Zs mutants, Zs4 and Zs7, with transposon insertions in the arnA
EC1 and arnT
EC1 genes, respectively, were randomly selected for the MIC assay. The results showed that they were 8‐fold more sensitive to zeamines than their parental strain ∆zmsA. In trans expression of arnT
EC1 in the mutant Zs7 fully restored its zeamine resistance to the level of strain ∆zmsA (Table 1), suggesting that the arn
EC1 genes are involved in D. oryzae resistance to zeamines. FIGURE 1Genetic organization and characterization of the arn
EC1 operon. (a) The genetic organization of the arn
EC1 operon. The arrows indicate the positions of transposon insertions in Zs strains. (b) Reverse transcription PCR (RT‐PCR) assay of the intergenic region of two neighbouring arn
EC1 genes. The dash lines in (a) show the amplified regions in the RT‐PCR assay. Genomic DNA (gDNA) and RNA obtained from the bacterial culture of Dickeya oryzae EC1 were amplified as controls. N indicates the negative control without nucleic acid. Genetic organization and characterization of the arn
EC1 operon. (a) The genetic organization of the arn
EC1 operon. The arrows indicate the positions of transposon insertions in Zs strains. (b) Reverse transcription PCR (RT‐PCR) assay of the intergenic region of two neighbouring arn
EC1 genes. The dash lines in (a) show the amplified regions in the RT‐PCR assay. Genomic DNA (gDNA) and RNA obtained from the bacterial culture of Dickeya oryzae EC1 were amplified as controls. N indicates the negative control without nucleic acid. Minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of zeamines and polymyxin B for Dickeya strains and Escherichia coli DH5α. Strain MIC (μg/mL). Zeamines Polymyxin B. D. oryzae ∆zmsA 1800 >1000. Zs4 225 ND. Zs7 225 ND. Zs7(pBB‐arnT
EC1) 1800 ND. ∆zmsA∆arnB
EC1 112.5 0.4. ∆zmsA∆arnC
EC1 225 1.6. ∆zmsA∆arnA
EC1 225 3.2. ∆zmsA∆arnD
EC1 112.5 1.6. ∆zmsA∆arnT
EC1 112.5 1.6. ∆zmsA∆arnE
EC1 225 1.6. ∆zmsA∆arnF
EC1 225 1.6. ∆zmsA∆arnB
EC1∆desB 14.1 0.4. ∆zmsA∆arnB
EC1(pBB‐arnB
EC1) 1800 >1000. ∆zmsA∆arnC
EC1(pBB‐arnC
EC1) 1800 >1000. ∆zmsA∆arnA
EC1(pBB‐arnA
EC1) 1800 >1000. ∆zmsA∆arnD
EC1(pBB‐arnD
EC1) 1800 >1000. ∆zmsA∆arnT
EC1(pBB‐arnT
EC1) 1800 >1000. D. dadantii 3937 28.1 1.6. 3937(pAmob, pBB) 28.1 1.6. 3937(pAmob‐arnBCADTEF
EC1, pBB‐ugd
EC1) 56.3 100. E. coli DH5α 14.1 0.4. Note: The values are the MICs of zeamines or polymyxin B for different bacterial strains as determined by the broth microdilution method. The wells of 96‐well plates containing Luria‐Bertani medium with twofold dilutions of zeamines were inoculated with fresh bacterial cultures and incubated at 28°C or 37°C for 18 h. The lowest concentration of zeamines that prevents the visible growth of each bacterial strain is considered as the MIC. This experiment was performed twice, each with three replicates. In the three replicates, the MICs for each bacterial strain were the same. ND, not determined. arnBCADTEF
EC1 constitute an operon encoding proteins involved in zeamine and polymyxin B resistance in D. oryzae Bioinformatics analysis showed that in the arn
EC1 operon (Figure 1a), arnB
EC1 (NCBI accession no. W909_RS19690) and arnC
EC1 (NCBI accession no. W909_RS19695) encode a putative UDP‐4‐amino‐4‐deoxy‐l‐arabinose‐oxoglutarate aminotransferase and a putative undecaprenyl phosphate‐4‐deoxy‐4‐formamido‐l‐arabinose transferase, respectively. ArnA
EC1 (NCBI accession no. W909_RS19700) encodes a putative decarboxylase/UDP‐4‐amino‐4‐deoxy‐l‐arabinose formyltransferase, and arnD
EC1 (NCBI accession no. W909_RS19705) and arnT
EC1 (NCBI accession no. W909_RS19710), located downstream in the operon, encode a putative 4‐deoxy‐4‐formamido‐l‐arabinose‐phosphoundecaprenol deformylase and an undecaprenyl phosphate‐α‐4‐amino‐4‐deoxy‐l‐arabinose arabinosyl transferase, respectively. The last two genes, arnE
EC1 (NCBI accession no. W909_RS19715) and arnF
EC1 (NCBI accession no. W909_RS19720), encode two putative l‐Ara4N‐phosphoundecaprenol flippase subunits. The proteins encoded by the arn
EC1 genes have high levels of similarity (above 57%) with their counterparts in S. enterica (McClelland et al., 2001), P. aeruginosa (McPhee et al., 2003), and D. dadantii (Costechareyre et al., 2013) (Table S3). In addition, the arn
EC1 operon also shares a conserved genetic organization with the arn operon (the pmr operon) in S. enterica (Figure 1a) (Gunn et al., 2000). Reverse transcription‐PCR (RT‐PCR) results indicated that these seven genes were cotranscribed in a way similar to their homologues in S. enterica (Figure 1b) (Gunn et al., 2000). In S. enterica, the arn operon confers bacterial resistance to polymyxin B, which also acts by damaging the bacterial cell envelope, similar to zeamines (Masschelein, Clauwers, Stalmans, et al., 2015). To further elucidate the roles of the arn
EC1 operon, in‐frame deletion mutants of arnBCADT
EC1 were generated in the background of the mutant ∆zmsA. MIC assay results showed that inactivation of these arn
EC1 operon genes resulted in an over 8‐fold decrease in the MIC of zeamines and an over 300‐fold decrease in the MIC of polymyxin B (Table 1). Conversely, in trans expression of the corresponding arn
EC1 genes, except for arnE
EC1 and arnF
EC1, in the mutants could fully restore the MICs of zeamines and polymyxin B (Table 1). These findings established the key roles of the arn
EC1 operon in conferring zeamine and polymyxin B resistance in D. oryzae. To further validate the role of the arn
EC1 operon in LPS modification and thus resistance to CAMPs, the arn
EC1 operon from D. oryzae EC1 was cloned and introduced into D. dadantii 3937, a zeamine‐ and polymyxin B‐sensitive strain (Table 1), together with the ugd
EC1 gene (NCBI accession no. W909_RS06165), whose homologue in E. coli was found to be epistatic to the arn operon for lipid A modification (Yan et al., 2007). MIC assay results indicated that heterologous expression of the arn
EC1 operon and the ugd
EC1 gene in D. dadantii 3937 could increase bacterial resistance to zeamines and particularly polymyxin B (Table 1). These findings suggest that the arn
EC1 operon from D. oryzae EC1 could effectively modify and reinforce the cell envelope of D. dadantii 3937, conferring strong resistance to the CAMP polymyxin B as well as zeamines. Our previous study unveiled that the RND efflux pump DesABC plays a key role in zeamine resistance in D. oryzae EC1. Inactivation of desB resulted in an about eightfold decrease in the MIC of zeamines (Liang et al., 2019). Similarly, inactivation of arnB
EC1 in the zmsA mutant background resulted in a 16‐fold decrease in the MIC of zeamines (Table 1). To test the synergistic effect of the DesABC efflux pump and the Arn LPS modification system, we generated a triple deletion mutant, ∆zmsA∆arnB
EC1∆desB, which showed a 128‐fold decrease in the MIC of zeamines compared to the parental strain ∆zmsA (Table 1). Significantly, double deletion of arnB
EC1/desB brought down the MIC to the level of the zeamine‐sensitive E. coli DH5α (Table 1), suggesting that the DesABC efflux pump and the Arn LPS modification system are dominant self‐protection mechanisms of D. oryzae against its self‐produced zeamines. Expression of the arn
EC1 operon is growth‐dependent but zeamine‐independent Our previous work indicated that expression of desAB is stimulated by zeamines (Liang et al., 2019). To test whether expression of the arn
EC1 operon is also zeamine‐dependent, the promoter region of the arn
EC1 operon was fused with the gfp‐coding region in plasmid pPROBE‐NT (Miller et al., 2000) to generate the reporter construct pArnEC1gfp. The relative fluorescence of the wild‐type strain EC1 and the zeamine‐minus mutant ∆zmsA harbouring the pArnEC1gfp construct, that is, EC1(pArnEC1gfp) and ∆zmsA(pArnEC1gfp), was determined in LS5 medium, which was optimized for zeamine production (Liao et al., 2014). The results showed that the relative fluorescence of EC1(pArnEC1gfp) increased along with the growth of D. oryzae EC1 (Figure 2a,b), suggesting that expression of the arn
EC1 operon is growth‐dependent. In addition, the relative fluorescence of EC1(pArnEC1gfp) and ∆zmsA(pArnEC1gfp) was comparable at different bacterial growth stages (Figure 2c), suggesting that unlike desAB, whose expression could be triggered by zeamines (Liang et al., 2019), expression of the arn
EC1 operon is independent of the exposure of zeamines. Moreover, the relative fluorescence of EC1(pArnEC1gfp) was higher than the relative fluorescence of EC1(pDesABgfp), a desAB reporter strain for determining desAB expression in the wild‐type strain EC1 (Liang et al., 2019), at different bacterial growth stages, especially at the early one when zeamines were not highly accumulated (Figure 2a,d), suggesting that the arn
EC1 genes had higher expression levels than desAB even when D. oryzae produced a small amount of zeamines. These findings suggest that the ArnEC1 LPS modification system is a zeamine‐independent resistance mechanism crucial to the self‐resistance of D. oryzae. FIGURE 2Expression pattern of the arn
EC1 operon. (a) Bacterial growth and zeamine production of Dickeya oryzae EC1 in LS5 medium. The cell‐free supernatants of strain EC1 were collected and sterilized by filtration for the zeamine production assay. (b) The relative fluorescence of strain EC1(pArnEC1gfp) at different cell densities as indicated. The value at OD600 = 0.5 was used for normalization. (c) The relative fluorescence of strains EC1(pArnEC1gfp) and ∆zmsA(pArnEC1gfp) at different cell densities as indicated. The value of strain EC1(pArnEC1gfp) at each cell density was used for normalizing the value of ∆zmsA(pArnEC1gfp) at the same cell density. (d) The relative fluorescence of strains EC1(pDesABgfp) and EC1(pArnEC1gfp) at different bacterial cell densities. The value of strain EC1(pDesABgfp) at each cell density was used for normalizing the value of EC1(pArnEC1gfp) at the same cell density. Data are presented as mean ± standard error (n = 3). Statistical analysis was performed using a two‐tailed unpaired Student's t test versus strain EC1(pArnEC1gfp) at OD600 = 0.5 (b) or strain EC1(pDesABgfp) at each growth stage (d). **p < 0.01. Expression pattern of the arn
EC1 operon. (a) Bacterial growth and zeamine production of Dickeya oryzae EC1 in LS5 medium. The cell‐free supernatants of strain EC1 were collected and sterilized by filtration for the zeamine production assay. (b) The relative fluorescence of strain EC1(pArnEC1gfp) at different cell densities as indicated. The value at OD600 = 0.5 was used for normalization. (c) The relative fluorescence of strains EC1(pArnEC1gfp) and ∆zmsA(pArnEC1gfp) at different cell densities as indicated. The value of strain EC1(pArnEC1gfp) at each cell density was used for normalizing the value of ∆zmsA(pArnEC1gfp) at the same cell density. (d) The relative fluorescence of strains EC1(pDesABgfp) and EC1(pArnEC1gfp) at different bacterial cell densities. The value of strain EC1(pDesABgfp) at each cell density was used for normalizing the value of EC1(pArnEC1gfp) at the same cell density. Data are presented as mean ± standard error (n = 3). Statistical analysis was performed using a two‐tailed unpaired Student's t test versus strain EC1(pArnEC1gfp) at OD600 = 0.5 (b) or strain EC1(pDesABgfp) at each growth stage (d). **p < 0.01. The arn
EC1 mutants show varied levels of bacterial virulence Given that the ArnEC1 genes are involved in bacterial LPS modification, we inferred that the virulence of their mutants might be somehow compromised in the process of pathogen–host interaction. Following this thought, the virulence of arn
EC1 in in‐frame deletion mutants was assayed against rice seeds, Chinese cabbage, and potato tubers. The results showed that compared to the wild‐type strain EC1, the virulence of the five single mutants with one of the arnBCADT
EC1 genes deleted was attenuated in inhibition of rice seed germination when challenged with 108‐fold dilutions of cell resuspensions (Figure 3a). Similarly, these mutants were also less virulent on Chinese cabbage (Figure 3b). Intriguingly, however, we found that compared to the single mutants in the arnCAT
EC1 genes, mutants ∆arnB
EC1 and ∆arnD
EC1 were much less virulent against rice seeds, Chinese cabbage, and potato tubers (Figures 3 and S1). In particular, deletion of arnB
EC1 eliminated the most virulence of strain EC1 compared to the arnCADT
EC1 single mutants in Chinese cabbage (Figure 3b). In trans expression of the corresponding arn
EC1 genes in the mutants could restore bacterial virulence (Figure 3). Given these findings, we reasoned that in addition to the role of the arn
EC1 operon in the bacterial LPS modification and hence the contribution to the in planta survival and virulence of D. oryzae EC1, arnB
EC1 and arnD
EC1 might play additional roles in modulation of D. oryzae physiology and virulence. FIGURE 3Virulence assay of Dickeya oryzae EC1 and derivatives on rice seeds, Chinese cabbage, and potato tubers. (a) Virulent effects of bacteria on rice seed germination. Bacterial cells cultured in Luria‐Bertani medium at the exponential phase were collected and resuspended to OD600 = 1.0 with double‐distilled water, and 108‐fold dilutions were prepared using double‐distilled water. The rice seed germination rate was determined at 5 days postinoculation. (b) Bacterial virulence against Chinese cabbage. (c) Bacterial virulence against potato tubers. In (b) and (c), 2 μL of bacterial suspension with OD600 = 1.0 was inoculated onto Chinese cabbages or potato tubers. The rotting areas were measured at 36–48 h postinoculation. In (a–c), data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 3). Statistical analysis was performed using a two‐tailed unpaired Student's t test versus strain EC1 (wild type, WT). **p < 0.01. Virulence assay of Dickeya oryzae EC1 and derivatives on rice seeds, Chinese cabbage, and potato tubers. (a) Virulent effects of bacteria on rice seed germination. Bacterial cells cultured in Luria‐Bertani medium at the exponential phase were collected and resuspended to OD600 = 1.0 with double‐distilled water, and 108‐fold dilutions were prepared using double‐distilled water. The rice seed germination rate was determined at 5 days postinoculation. (b) Bacterial virulence against Chinese cabbage. (c) Bacterial virulence against potato tubers. In (b) and (c), 2 μL of bacterial suspension with OD600 = 1.0 was inoculated onto Chinese cabbages or potato tubers. The rotting areas were measured at 36–48 h postinoculation. In (a–c), data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 3). Statistical analysis was performed using a two‐tailed unpaired Student's t test versus strain EC1 (wild type, WT). **p < 0.01. The ArnEC1 system is negatively associated with the bacterial mucoid morphotype and positively involved in biofilm formation During the construction of arn
EC1 in‐frame deletion mutants, we noticed that inactivation of any of the arnBCAT
EC1 genes resulted in a phenotypic conversion from nonmucoid to mucoid when bacterial strains were cultured on minimal medium (MM) agar plates supplemented with 5% (wt/vol) sucrose (Figure 4a), which could be rescued by in trans expression of corresponding arn
EC1 genes in the mutants (Figure S2). In contrast, deletion of arnD
EC1 did not seem to affect bacterial morphology (Figures 4a and S2). A bacterial mucoid phenotype is often associated with the overproduction of capsular polysaccharides (CPSs) and biofilm formation in bacteria (Mann & Wozniak, 2012). Consistent with their potential roles in LPS modification and CPS production, we showed that the arn
EC1 genes are involved in biofilm formation, a virulence‐related trait of D. oryzae EC1 (Chen et al., 2020; Lv et al., 2018, 2022; Shi et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2016). Inactivation of any of the arnBCAT
EC1 genes abolished the biofilm formation of D. oryzae EC1 (Figure 4b). Conversely, expression of the corresponding gene in trans could restore biofilm formation (Figure 4b). These findings support the notion that the ArnEC1 enzymes might collectively and separately contribute to the physiology and virulence of D. oryzae. FIGURE 4The arn
EC1 genes are required for the bacterial nonmucoid morphotype and biofilm formation. (a) The morphotype of bacterial strains cultured on minimal medium (MM) agar plates supplemented with 5% (wt/vol) sucrose. (b) Mutation of the arn
EC1 genes abolished biofilm formation. WT, Dickeya oryzae wild‐type strain EC1; M, mutant; C, complementation strain. The arn
EC1 genes are required for the bacterial nonmucoid morphotype and biofilm formation. (a) The morphotype of bacterial strains cultured on minimal medium (MM) agar plates supplemented with 5% (wt/vol) sucrose. (b) Mutation of the arn
EC1 genes abolished biofilm formation. WT, Dickeya oryzae wild‐type strain EC1; M, mutant; C, complementation strain. The arn
EC1 genes play different roles in bacterial growth and swimming motility To further elucidate the roles of ArnEC1, we monitored the growth patterns of arnBCADT
EC1 mutants in Luria–Bertani (LB) medium, in which D. oryzae EC1 is unable to produce a detectable level of zeamines (Liang et al., 2019). The results showed that compared to the mutants ∆arnA
EC1 and ∆arnC
EC1, which displayed a comparable growth pattern to the wild‐type strain EC1, the growth of mutants ∆arnB
EC1 and ∆arnD
EC1 was moderately or much retarded, respectively, whereas the mutant ∆arnT
EC1 exhibited an increment in growth (Figure 5a). The swimming motility assay showed that inactivation of either arnB
EC1 or arnD
EC1 significantly reduced the diameters of chemotactic zones (Figure 5b). In trans expression of arnBDT
EC1 genes in the mutants restored the growth of arnBDT
EC1 mutants and the swimming motility of arnBD
EC1 mutants to wild‐type levels (Figure 5). FIGURE 5The roles of arn
EC1 genes in bacterial growth and swimming motility. (a) Growth patterns of Dickeya oryzae EC1, the arn
EC1 mutants, and the complementation strains. Statistical analysis was performed using a two‐tailed unpaired Student's t test versus strain EC1. The statistical analysis results are shown at different time points above the growth curves, with the colours corresponding to the growth curves of the arn
EC1 mutants. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. (b) Swimming motility of strain EC1 and the arn
EC1 mutants. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 3). Statistical analysis was performed using a two‐tailed unpaired Student's t test versus strain EC1. **p < 0.01. The roles of arn
EC1 genes in bacterial growth and swimming motility. (a) Growth patterns of Dickeya oryzae EC1, the arn
EC1 mutants, and the complementation strains. Statistical analysis was performed using a two‐tailed unpaired Student's t test versus strain EC1. The statistical analysis results are shown at different time points above the growth curves, with the colours corresponding to the growth curves of the arn
EC1 mutants. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. (b) Swimming motility of strain EC1 and the arn
EC1 mutants. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 3). Statistical analysis was performed using a two‐tailed unpaired Student's t test versus strain EC1. **p < 0.01. To determine how ArnBEC1 and ArnDEC1 could affect bacterial growth and swimming motility, the cell morphology of mutants ∆arnB
EC1 and ∆arnD
EC1 was analysed by optical microscopy and transmission electron microscopy. The results unveiled that the cells of mutant ∆arnB
EC1 appeared much longer than those of the wild‐type strain EC1 and mutant ∆arnD
EC1, which was restored to the wild‐type level by in trans expression of arnB
EC1 (Figure 6a). Further transmission electron microscopy analysis showed that cell division of ∆arnB
EC1 was retarded (Figure 6b). These findings suggest that the compromised growth of ArnBEC1 null mutants might be related to its role in bacterial cell division. Intriguingly, however, deletion of arnD
EC1 did not seem to affect bacterial cell division (Figure 6), although the growth of its mutant was more severely retarded than that of mutant ∆arnB
EC1 (Figure 5a). FIGURE 6The role of arnB
EC1 in bacterial cell division. (a) Morphology and cell length of Dickeya oryzae EC1, mutants ∆arnB
EC1 and ∆arnD
EC1, and the complementation strain ∆arnB
EC1(pBB‐arnB
EC1) as determined by optical microscopy. Data are presented as mean ± standard error (n = 15). Statistical analysis was performed using a two‐tailed unpaired Student's t test versus strain EC1. **p < 0.01. (b) Morphology of strain EC1 and mutants ∆arnB
EC1 and ∆arnD
EC1 as determined by transmission electron microscopy. The experiment was performed twice; representative images are shown in the figure. The role of arnB
EC1 in bacterial cell division. (a) Morphology and cell length of Dickeya oryzae EC1, mutants ∆arnB
EC1 and ∆arnD
EC1, and the complementation strain ∆arnB
EC1(pBB‐arnB
EC1) as determined by optical microscopy. Data are presented as mean ± standard error (n = 15). Statistical analysis was performed using a two‐tailed unpaired Student's t test versus strain EC1. **p < 0.01. (b) Morphology of strain EC1 and mutants ∆arnB
EC1 and ∆arnD
EC1 as determined by transmission electron microscopy. The experiment was performed twice; representative images are shown in the figure. Transcriptomics analysis and functional study reveal the target genes regulated by ArnBEC1 To decipher the molecular mechanism by which ArnBEC1 modulates bacterial phenotypes beyond antibiotic resistance, transcriptomics analysis was performed to identify the differentially expressed genes in the wild‐type strain EC1 and mutant ∆arnB
EC1 at the exponential growth phase (optical density at 600 nm [OD600] about 1.0 in LB medium). The results showed that inactivation of arnB
EC1 led to significant changes in gene expression, with 291 genes being up‐regulated and 367 genes being down‐regulated (absolute log2[fold change] ≥1, Tables S4 and S5). In particular, a range of genes associated with phenotypic conversion between nonmucoid and mucoid, cell division, and swimming motility were found in the ArnBEC1 regulon. We firstly conducted detailed bioinformatics analyses on the 291 genes that were significantly up‐regulated in mutant ∆arnB
EC1 (Table S4). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis showed that the O‐antigen nucleotide sugar biosynthesis pathway was significantly up‐regulated in mutant ∆arnB
EC1 (p
adj ≤ 0.05), including the genes located in two eps (exopolysaccharide polysaccharide) clusters (Figure 7a, Table S4). One eps cluster (NCBI accession nos. W909_RS06075 to W909_RS06155) contains the homologues of the wzabc genes. In E. coli, the wzabc genes encode proteins involved in group I CPS transport (Dong et al., 2006). The other eps cluster contains the homologues of yjbEFGH. In E. coli, the yjbEFGH genes are responsible for the production of an unknown exopolysaccharide (Ferrieres et al., 2007). Our transcriptomics analysis results showed that the genes in these two eps clusters were up‐regulated at least 4‐fold in mutant ∆arnB
EC1 (log2[fold change] ≥ 2, Table S4). FIGURE 7Transcriptomics analysis revealed the genes regulated by ArnEC1. (a) The genetic organization of the exopolysaccharide polysaccharide clusters up‐regulated in mutant ∆arnB
EC1 compared to Dickeya oryzae EC1. (b) The relative transcript levels of cps1 in strain EC1 and the arn
EC1 mutants with the value of strain EC1 being used as the control. (c) The genetic organization of the S10 ribosomal protein gene cluster down‐regulated in mutant ∆arnB
EC1 compared to strain EC1. (d) The relative transcript levels of S10 ribosomal genes in strain EC1 and mutants ∆arnB
EC1 and ∆arnD
EC1. (e) The profile of RNA extracted from strain EC1 and mutants ∆arnB
EC1 and ∆arnD
EC1. RNA integrity (left) and RNA concentration (right) were analysed. The RNA concentration was calculated by dividing the amount of RNA by the volumes of bacterial cell cultures used for RNA extraction. Data are presented as mean ± standard error (n = 4) (b, d) or mean ± standard deviation (n = 3) (e). Statistical analysis was performed using either the permutation test (b, d) or a two‐tailed unpaired Student's t test (e) versus strain EC1. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. Transcriptomics analysis revealed the genes regulated by ArnEC1. (a) The genetic organization of the exopolysaccharide polysaccharide clusters up‐regulated in mutant ∆arnB
EC1 compared to Dickeya oryzae EC1. (b) The relative transcript levels of cps1 in strain EC1 and the arn
EC1 mutants with the value of strain EC1 being used as the control. (c) The genetic organization of the S10 ribosomal protein gene cluster down‐regulated in mutant ∆arnB
EC1 compared to strain EC1. (d) The relative transcript levels of S10 ribosomal genes in strain EC1 and mutants ∆arnB
EC1 and ∆arnD
EC1. (e) The profile of RNA extracted from strain EC1 and mutants ∆arnB
EC1 and ∆arnD
EC1. RNA integrity (left) and RNA concentration (right) were analysed. The RNA concentration was calculated by dividing the amount of RNA by the volumes of bacterial cell cultures used for RNA extraction. Data are presented as mean ± standard error (n = 4) (b, d) or mean ± standard deviation (n = 3) (e). Statistical analysis was performed using either the permutation test (b, d) or a two‐tailed unpaired Student's t test (e) versus strain EC1. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. In E. coli, the mucoid phenotype is associated with the overproduction of CPSs (Wall et al., 2018). To address whether the mucoid phenotype of arnBCAT
EC1 mutants is associated with the up‐regulation of the CPS genes found in the transcriptomics analysis, cps1 expression in mutants ∆arnB
EC1, ∆arnC
EC1, ∆arnA
EC1, and ∆arnT
EC1 was compared to that in the wild‐type strain EC1 by reverse transcription‐quantitative PCR (RT‐qPCR) analysis. The results showed that compared to the wild‐type strain EC1, cps1 expression was increased 15‐ to 48‐fold in these four mutants (Figure 7b). In‐frame deletion of cps1 in the backgrounds of single mutants in the arnBCA
EC1 genes led to conversion from a mucoid to a nonmucoid phenotype (Figures 4a and S2). These findings indicate that ArnEC1 proteins maintain the nonmucoid morphotype of D. oryzae EC1 through repression of CPS production. We then analysed the 367 genes down‐regulated in the mutant ∆arnB
EC1 (Table S5). KEGG pathway analysis indicated that the ribosome pathway was significantly affected in mutant ∆arnB
EC1 (p
adj ≤ 0.05, Table S5). In particular, the genes in the S10 ribosomal protein gene cluster (NCBI accession nos. W909_RS17515 to W909_RS17645) were significantly down‐regulated (Figure 7c, Table S5). Previous studies with E. coli and Bacillus subtilis unveiled that the genes in the S10 ribosomal protein gene cluster, that is, L2, L3, L17, and S11, are essential for bacterial growth, cell division, and swimming motility (Klitgaard et al., 2015; Suzuki et al., 2014; Takada et al., 2014; Zouine et al., 2000), which are the phenotypes modulated by ArnBEC1 in D. oryzae EC1. Consistent with the transcriptomics analysis results, RT‐qPCR analysis results confirmed that the transcript levels of L2, L3, L4, L17, S10, and S11 in the S10 ribosomal protein gene cluster were significantly decreased in mutant ∆arnB
EC1 compared to the wild‐type strain EC1 and mutant ∆arnD
EC1 (Figure 7d), an arn
EC1 mutant with defects in bacterial growth and swimming motility as mutant ∆arnB
EC1 (Figure 5). In E. coli, RNA biosynthesis is closely linked to the production of ribosomal proteins (Zengel & Lindahl, 1994). We demonstrated that although RNA integrity in mutant ∆arnB
EC1 was comparable to that in the wild‐type strain EC1 and mutant ∆arnD
EC1 (Figure 7e), mutant ∆arnB
EC1 had a lower amount of RNA than the wild‐type strain EC1 and mutant ∆arnD
EC1 (Figure 7e). These findings seem to suggest that ArnBEC1 affects bacterial growth, cell division, and swimming motility through regulating a specific pathway to maintain homeostasis of RNA biosynthesis and expression of S10 ribosomal genes in D. oryzae.