2. Results 2.1. Immunomodulatory Potential of Live Lactobacillus Strains We selected six Lactobacillus strains (L1–L6) for an in-depth investigation of their immunomodulatory activities based on previous disease-association studies [28]. To assess the activity of the selected strains, we designed a co-culture experiment in which we incubated each strain with colon carcinoma cells, Caco-2, followed by a challenge with the pathogen C. difficile, which represented gut pathogens known to induce strong inflammatory conditions in the colon. The Caco-2 cell line, either alone or in a co-culture with other cells, is widely used in the screening of immunomodulatory drugs, and some reports suggest that this cell model might be predictive of in vivo behavior [29,30,31]. We conducted the initial screening of live probiotics using a pre-treatment design in which the live strains were incubated first, followed by the pathogen challenge; this design mimics the natural ecological setting in a balanced microbiome in which the beneficial strains are already established before pathogen colonization. Thereafter, we used the cells’ supernatant to measure the secreted amount of IL-8, IL-6, IL-1β, TNF-α, and IL-10 via ELISA (Figure 2A). Infection with C. difficile alone (P) resulted in a significant increase in proinflammatory cytokines, although we were not able to detect IL-10. The most induced cytokine was IL-8, with levels 24-fold those of the untreated cells and the media-only control (C1 and C2, respectively) (Figure 2B). This finding is consistent with previously published data that show that C. difficile induces inflammation via potent upregulation of IL-8, IL-1β, and IL-6 [32]. Inoculation with five Lactobacillus strains resulted in a one- to five-fold increase in IL-8 compared to the untreated cells, except for L4. These data are consistent with previous reports showing that some Lactobacillus strains can result in initial stimulation of the immune response through the induction of IL-8 and IL-1β secretion and the generation of reactive oxygen species [33,34]. Cells incubated with L1-L8 strains prior to the pathogen challenge showed a 50–90% drop in IL-8 secretion. The secreted amounts of the other tested cytokines followed a similar pattern to IL-8. IL-6 secretion increased 11-fold following the pathogen challenge, and dropped to 20%, 25%, 40%, 0%, 40%, and 30% of its augmented value with L1-L6, respectively. IL-1β secretion increased 12-fold with the pathogen, decreased by 60% with L5 and L6, and decreased by 73% with L2 and L3. L1 and L4 resulted in the most significant reduction in IL-1β of 87% (Figure 2D). TNF-α secretion showed a 12-fold increase following the pathogen-only challenge, no difference with L1, and a one-fold increase with the L2-L6 strains (Figure 2E). With Lactobacillus treatments, the secreted amount of TNF-α dropped to 70–84%, with the most intense reduction observed with L4 (Figure 2E). Taken together, our data show that all the tested strains resulted in a significant decrease in the measured cytokines following the pathogen challenge; therefore, it is worth further investigating this activity’s mechanism of action to identify whether it occurs due to secreted molecules or whether it is attributed to simple competition between the live strains and C. difficile. Previous reports show that some Lactobacillus strains reduce the adhesion rate of C. difficile and hinder its efficient colonization [35]. Our data also support the idea that not all bacteria can reduce inflammation. For example, E. coli and Enterococcus faecalis increased the inflammation caused by C. difficile when tested using the same experimental design (data are not shown), suggesting that the observed anti-inflammatory activity of the tested strains might be a unique feature. 2.2. Combined Experimental/Computational Approach to Identifying the Functional Chemical Mediators In our co-culture experiment, the L4 strain showed the most significant activity in suppressing the release of all measured proinflammatory cytokines; this neutralized the inflammatory effect of the pathogen at the basal level of untreated cells for IL-8, IL-6, and IL-1β, and resulted in the most significant decrease in TNF-α occurring in L4 compared to all the other strains. Moreover, incubation with L4 did not result in an initial increase in the measured proinflammatory cytokines, in contrast to the other strains, which showed at least a one-fold increase in at least one cytokine secretion compared to the untreated control cells or media only. For these reasons, we selected L4 for further investigation of the chemistry behind this activity. First, to verify whether the observed activity was mediated by a secreted metabolite, we tested the activity of the cell-free extracts using the same experimental design, followed by measuring the amount of secreted IL-8. The data showed that the cell-free extract of L4 reduced IL-8 secretion by 84% of its induced level with C. difficile. Notably, the cell-free extracts of all the other strains were not shown to significantly reduce IL-8 compared to the corresponding live strains. For a more in-depth investigation, we scaled up the culturing of L4 (L. rhamnosus). We cultured L. rhamnosus in 3 L of MRS medium for 24 h at 37 °C, and collected the metabolites in a mixture of HP20, XAD7, and XAD16 resins. The crude extract was fractionated on a reverse phase C18 column. The generated fractions were tested for immunomodulatory activity using the same experimental procedure, and IL-8 was measured as an indicator of activity. Out of the twelve fractions, three showed a significant reduction in IL-8 production, with one fraction resulting in 100% neutralization of IL-8 by the pathogen alone. Further LC/MS-MS examination of this fraction revealed a major compound with an MW of 5515 Da and a fragmentation pattern corresponding to the peptide compound (Figure 3). To predict the sequence of the peptide, we analyzed the genome of L4 (Lactobacillus casei subsp. rhamnosus, ATCC 7469) using DeepRipp software [36], a deep learning tool that we previously developed to predict unmodified and post-translationally modified peptides from genomic or metagenomic data. DeepRipp generates a confidence score and structure prediction of the encoded peptides and links the computational prediction from the genome to the possible corresponding mass in LC/MS-MS data. Our investigation led to the identification of the sequence of an unmodified peptide with a theoretical MW of 5516.32 Da, matching the observed MW for the candidate active molecule in the extract. The sequence for this encoded peptide is MNKLNEVELSKISGGIGPLVMNKLNEVELSKISGGIGPLVIPVAAILGFLATDAWNHADELVAGVKQGWERS. Our investigation of the genome and cell-free extracts of the other strains did not show evidence of the presence of this unique metabolite. To further investigate the biological activity of the identified peptide, we synthesized it through Genscript and named it lactomodulin. 2.3. Lactomodulin Is a Unique Multifunctional Molecule with Minimal Toxicity in Cell Lines Before evaluating the anti-inflammatory activity of lactomodulin, we first tested the cytotoxicity of the peptide on two different GIT-derived cell lines (Caco-2 and HT-29) using an MTT assay. The IC50 of lactomodulin against Caco-2 was 60 μmol, compared to 40 μmol for HT-29 (Figure 4A), indicating that lactomodulin toxicity is minimal. Our data suggest that lactomodulin exerts higher toxicity in HT-29, which is consistent with a previous suggestion of elevated sensitivity in HT-29 to toxins compared to Caco-2 [37]. To further investigate the anti-inflammatory activity of the pure molecule, we first tested the ability of four different concentrations of lactomodulin below the IC50 value in Caco-2 (50, 10, 1, and 0.5 μmol) to decrease IL-8 secretion using the pre-treatment experimental model. We experimentally determined the tested concentration using a panel of serial dilutions and the range of effective concentrations that matched the live strain inhibition level. The results showed that lactomodulin at a 50 μmol concentration increased inflammation up to 12-fold compared to the untreated cells, while 10 μmol resulted in a 0.74-fold increase. Neither the 1 nor the 0.5 μmol concentration of lactomodulin showed a significant difference compared to untreated cells (Figure 4B). When challenged with the pathogen, all concentrations resulted in a significant drop in IL-8 secretion. The 50 μmol concentration showed the lowest level of activity, decreasing IL-8 to 32%, followed by concentrations of both 10 and 0.5 μmol, which decreased IL-8 to ~85%. The 1 μmol concentration of lactomodulin neutralized the IL-8 level to a baseline of untreated cells without any initial increase in inflammation and was thus selected for further experiments (Figure 4B). For a more in-depth understanding of the anti-inflammatory activity of lactomodulin, we tested the compound using two different models: (1) a pre-treatment model in which 1 μmol of lactomodulin was added 6 h before stimulation with different inducers, followed by incubation for a total of 18 h, and (2) a post-treatment model in which the cells were first stimulated for 2 h with inducers, followed by the addition of lactomodulin at the same concentration and a total incubation time of 18 h (Figure 5A). To rule out an indirect effect of lactomodulin on the pathogen, we used three different inducers of inflammation: (1) C. difficile (P), (2) TNF-α (I-1), and (3) purified toxin A from C. difficile (I-2). Thereafter, we measured the amount of secreted IL-8, IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α using ELISA. Overall, lactomodulin inhibited or significantly decreased all the tested cytokines in both models and with all the inducers used. The induced cells showed a 24- to 27-fold increase in IL-8 production with different inducers (Figure 5B). Both pre-treatment and post-treatment with lactomodulin neutralized IL-8 to a baseline of untreated cells. We observed a similar trend with IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α, and noted that lactomodulin is more effective at neutralizing the effect of the pathogen or TNF-α compared to toxin A, with a minor (~6–7% less activity) but statistically different value of p < 0.05 (Figure 5C–E). For example, the reduction in IL-1β secretion with lactomodulin was 94% in both models when the cells were challenged with toxin A, compared to 100% when the cells were induced with the pathogen or TNF-α. We did not detect IL-10 in the supernatant in cells treated with lactomodulin alone or with the inducers. Although we did not detect an increase in IL-10 upon treatment with the live strains or the pure peptide, a previous study claimed strong anti-inflammatory activity of a protein fraction from L. plantarum in murine cells [38]. Given the nature of lactomodulin and how it compares to similar peptides, we tested whether the compound exerts antibiotic-like activity against C. difficile. We tested the inhibitory activity of the compound against C. difficile using the agar diffusion method, in which it showed strong antibacterial activity (Figure 6A). We then conducted a broth microdilution assay to determine the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC). The data showed that MIC50 of lactomodulin was 0.4 μmol (Figure 6B), which is comparable to previously characterized antimicrobial peptides [39]. To understand the mode of action of lactomodulin, we determined its minimal bactericidal concentration in C. difficile. We observed no growth on agar plates with 0.9 μmol of lactomodulin, suggesting that it has a bactericidal nature. To identify the spectrum of activity, we tested the compound on different human pathogens, including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), Pseudomonas aeruginosa, E. coli, vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VRE), Listeria monocytogenes, and Salmonella enterica. The results suggest that lactomodulin exerted potent antibiotic activity, mostly against Gram-positive bacteria, and was highly effective against the antibiotic-resistant strain (MRSA) (Figure 6C). The highest MIC50 of lactomodulin was observed in MRSA with a value equal to 0.2 μmol, followed by C. difficile and VRE, with values of 0.4 μmol, and then B. cereus and L. monocytogenes at 0.5 μmol. Lactomodulin did not show activity against Gram-negative bacteria, including P. aeruginosa and S. enterica, but it showed activity against E. coli at a high concentration, 14 times its MIC50 in MRSA. The positive control antibiotics used in this study were metronidazole, daptomycin, amoxycillin, and ciprofloxacin at concentrations of 1–5 μg/mL. We tested lactomodulin for inhibitory activity against fungi, including Candida albicans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, but it lacked antifungal activity, even at high concentrations of up to 20 times its average MIC50, against Gram-positive bacteria.