Results Identification of a conserved Ile(-2) residue in Bradymonadales derived lasso peptide precursors Unfortunately, the bsf cluster is prone to be silent under laboratory conditions, and the Bradymonas sediminis FA350 strain is difficult to genetically manipulate. Thus, heterologous expression of the bsf cluster has been tried in other hosts. Briefly, the DNA fragment containing all the bsf genes and the flanking regions was removed from the genomic DNA by restriction digestion and further connected to the vector p15A via Red/ET recombination. The obtained plasmid (p15A-bsf) was then transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3), E. coli GB2005 and Schlegelella brevitalea DSM 7029, or conjugated into Burkholderia gladioli ATCC10248 and Burkholderia thailandensis E264, respectively, for heterologous expression in different culture media. However, no mass corresponding to the predicted lasso peptide has been observed. Moreover, several constitutive promotors such as PTn5-Km, Papra and the inducible promoter Ptet have been inserted upstream to bsfC, respectively, but the mature lasso peptide has never been detected. This results in difficulty to demarcate the boundary between the leader and the core peptide in BsfA. It was reported that the conserved Tyr(-17), Pro(-14), and Leu(-12) residues in leader peptides were required for the recognition by the B1 proteins (Chekan et al., 2019; Sumida et al., 2019). To identify the core peptide of BsfA, surveys of genomic data uncovered several similar lasso peptide BGCs in other Bradymonadales, including Persicimonas caeni YN101 (pcy), Microvenator marinus V1718 (mmv), Lujinxingia litoralis B210 (llb), L. sediminis SEH01 (lss) and L. vulgaris TMQ2 (lvt), et al. (Supplementary Figure S2). Compared with bsf, the D gene is lacking in mmv and the N genes are absent in the llb, lss, and lvt clusters. Sequence alignment of the precursor peptides showed a conserved YxxPxL (where x is any amino acid) motif (Figure 2; Supplementary Figure S2), indicating that these residues are always spanning positions (-17) to (-12) in leader peptides. Thus, the conserved Gly1 is at the N-terminus of the core peptide and it cyclizes with Asp8 to form the macrolactam ring. A threonine at the penultimate position of the leader region was hitherto found in all previously reported lasso peptide precursors and was shown to be a recognition element for effective enzymatic processing (Supplementary Figure S3; Pan et al., 2012; Hegemann et al., 2015). Nevertheless, our sequence alignment revealed that the penultimate residue in all lasso peptide precursors found in Bradymonadales spp. was an isoleucine, which was distinct from the known lasso peptides (Figure 2; Supplementary Figure S2). Figure 2Conserved motif identified in Ile/Val(-2) containing leader peptides derived from Bradymonadales, Acidobacteriaceae, and Sphingomonadales, respectively. Conserved motif identified in Ile/Val(-2) containing leader peptides derived from Bradymonadales, Acidobacteriaceae, and Sphingomonadales, respectively. Characterization of the phosphorylation activity of BsfK in conjunction with BsfB1 A BLASTP search using the BsfK protein sequence as input revealed that it was a hypothetical protein with a very low identity (<35%) with histidine containing phospho carrier protein (HPr) kinases (Supplementary Figure S4). To validate the function of BsfK, the pRSFDuet-1 vector was used for the co-expression of N-terminally hexaHis-tagged BsfA (BamHI + HindIII) and untagged BsfK (NdeI + XhoI). After purification, high performance liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-high resolution mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-HRMS) was used for the detection of PTMs in the N-terminally tagged BsfA. Apart from the dominant unmodified BsfA (calculated 7279.6405 Da, found 7279.6614 Da), a small component with a mass increase of 79.9640 Da was also detected, which was barely visible when bsfK was omitted (Figures 3A,B; Supplementary Figure S5). This increased mass was in line with a monophosphorylation of BsfA (calculated 79.9663 Da), indicating that BsfK was indeed a peptide kinase and catalyzed phosphorylation of the precursor peptide BsfA. Given that B. sediminis FA350 belongs to a novel order of Deltaproteobacteria, it was not surprising that BsfK showed a very low identity (<35%) with other proteins in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database. Figure 3In vivo characterization of the phosphorylation activity on BsfA. (A) HRMS spectrum of unmodified BsfA. (B) HRMS spectrum of BsfA co-expressed with BsfK. (C) HRMS spectrum of BsfA co-expressed with BsfB1 and BsfK. (D) MS/MS fragmentation analysis of core peptide fragment after trypsin digestion. In vivo characterization of the phosphorylation activity on BsfA. (A) HRMS spectrum of unmodified BsfA. (B) HRMS spectrum of BsfA co-expressed with BsfK. (C) HRMS spectrum of BsfA co-expressed with BsfB1 and BsfK. (D) MS/MS fragmentation analysis of core peptide fragment after trypsin digestion. Next, untagged BsfB1was introduced into the co-expression system above. In comparison with the BsfA and BsfK co-expression experiment (Figure 3B), the monophosphorylated BsfA was increased substantially and became dominant in the BsfB1-containing co-expression system (Figure 3C; Supplementary Figure S5). Unmodified BsfA was also observed, albeit in a minor amount. Evidently, BsfB1 greatly enhanced the phosphorylation activity of BsfK, just like in other cases RREs could increase the turnover rates for precursor epimerization and hydroxylation (Feng et al., 2020; Zhang and Seyedsayamdost, 2020). Phosphorylation is a very common PTM in RiPP biosynthesis, which usually occurs at the hydroxyl groups of Ser or Thr residues (Montalbán-López et al., 2021). The phosphorylations previously reported in lasso peptides were introduced into the precursors prior to leader excision and core macrolactamization, and were all located at the C-terminal Ser residues of the precursors (Zhu et al., 2016b,c; Zyubko et al., 2019). This cannot occur in BsfA with a C-terminal aspartate residue. Additionally, the identities between BsfK and the known lasso peptide kinases are relatively low (<21%), indicative of a distinct phosphorylated position from the known lasso peptides. Trypsin digestion and subsequent tandem MS analysis of phosphorylated precursor peptide pointed to the Ser3 residue as the modification site by BsfK (Figure 3D; Supplementary Table S1). This was further confirmed by co-expression experiments of site-directed mutations as BsfA S3A was principally unmodified despite a low production yield, whereas T2A, S10A and T11A substitutions displayed a majority of monophosphorylated peptide, just like the native BsfA (Supplementary Figure S6). It is reasonable to speculate that similar phosphorylations also occurred at the same position in other Bradymonadales derived clusters, as Ser3 in BsfA is conserved among all the precursor peptides except for LvtA, which contains a threonine instead of serine at this position (Supplementary Figure S2). To expand the repertoire of BsfK beyond Ser phosphorylation, Ser3 was mutated to other hydroxyl containing residues (i.e., Thr and Tyr). It was observed that while BsfA S3T was phosphorylated efficiently, no phosphorylation was observed with BsfA S3Y, surmising that BsfK is somewhat substrate tolerant (Supplementary Figure S7; Supplementary Table S2). This finding makes it likely that the Thr3 residue in the LvtA precursor could also be phosphorylated by LvtK. In addition, the kinase BsfK exhibits strict regioselectivity for the third residue of the BsfA core peptide, since the phosphorylation of Thr2 has never been detected. We heterologously expressed the kinase BsfK and BsfB1 to further certify their functions (Supplementary Figure S8). After purification, the obtained N-terminally hexaHis-tagged BsfK was characterized in vitro in the presence of the BsfA-precursor, ATP and magnesium chloride. In accordance with the in vivo characterization, BsfK phosphorylated the precursor peptide in a very low yield, whereas no conversion was observed in the absence of ATP, magnesium chloride, or with heat-treated BsfK (Supplementary Figure S9). This process was greatly accelerated by adding BsfB1, suggesting that the RRE protein plays an important role in phosphorylation. In addition to ATP, other NTPs are also able to act as phosphate donors for the precursor peptide phosphorylation (Supplementary Figure S9). Sequence alignment of the Bradymonadales derived lasso peptide kinases and the previously characterized lasso peptide precursor kinases reveals a highly conversed motif (i.e., H148-G163-G166-G168-K169-S170-D186-D187 in BsfK; Supplementary Figure S10). The His residue is proposed to stabilize the last Asp, the Lys and the three glycine residues are considered to facilitate the binding of ATP, whereas the Ser and the conjugate Asp residues directly coordinate a magnesium ion or interact with this ion through a water intermediary (Allen et al., 2003; Zhu et al., 2016c). The importance of the corresponding residues in BsfK were validated by alanine substitutions. H148A, G163A and D186A exchanges greatly suppress the solubility of BsfK, indicative of their prominent roles in protein folding, while other variants show little influence on the expression of BsfK (Supplementary Figure S8). In vitro characterization of the variants revealed that G166A and G168A have almost the same catalytic activity compared with wild type BsfK, whereas the activities of other variants are diminished in varying degrees (Supplementary Figure S11). These results point out the significance of H148, G163, K169, S170, D186 and D187 for BsfK catalysis, just like the known lasso peptide kinases. Validation of the role of the Ile(-2) residue in BsfA in lasso peptide processing Since the bsf cluster is silent under laboratory conditions, we attempted to characterize the protease BsfB2 to further affirm the demarcation between the leader and the core peptide. The cold shock-induced expression vector pCold TF was used to express the BsfB2 carrying an N-terminal trigger factor (TF) tag (Supplementary Figure S8). HPLC-ESI-HRMS analysis of the assay containing phosphorylated BsfA-precursor, ATP, magnesium chloride, BsfB1 and TF-BsfB2 revealed a dramatic decrease of the precursor peptide and the emergence of two novel peaks with the masses 2095.8023 and 5281.8009 Da compared with the negative controls omitting BsfB1 or BsfB2 (Figure 4A; Supplementary Figure S12). The former mass is identical to the phosphorylated core peptide consisting of the C-terminal 21 amino acids of the precursor (calculated: 2095.8080 Da), which was confirmed by MS/MS fragmentation analysis (Figure 4C; Supplementary Table S3). The latter mass is equal to the N-terminal methionine excised and hexaHis-tagged leader peptide (calculated: 5281.8094 Da). A similar result was obtained when unphosphorylated precursor peptide was used instead of phosphorylated precursor. The mass of unphosphorylated BsfA core peptide (2015.8341 Da, calculated, 2015.8417 Da) was detected and its identify was further verified by MS/MS analysis (Figures 4B,C; Supplementary Table S4). These results indisputably proved that the penultimate position of the leader peptide is an atypical isoleucine residue rather than threonine. The necessity of BsfB1 for precursor peptide phosphorylation and leader peptide cleavage irrefutably illustrated its dual functions in lasso peptide maturation. Moreover, no phosphorylated peptide was generated when the core peptide was utilized as the substrate of BsfK (Supplementary Figure S13), which is attributable to the fact that neither the kinase nor the RRE did recognize the core peptide as substrate. Figure 4In vitro characterization of the peptidase activity of BsfB2. (A) HRMS spectra of leader and core peptides released through BsfB2 treatment of phosphorylated BsfA precursor. (B) HRMS spectra of leader and core peptides released through BsfB2 treatment of unmodified BsfA precursor. (C) MS/MS fragmentation analysis of (phosphorylated) core peptide fragments. In vitro characterization of the peptidase activity of BsfB2. (A) HRMS spectra of leader and core peptides released through BsfB2 treatment of phosphorylated BsfA precursor. (B) HRMS spectra of leader and core peptides released through BsfB2 treatment of unmodified BsfA precursor. (C) MS/MS fragmentation analysis of (phosphorylated) core peptide fragments. To the best of our knowledge, BsfA is the first experimentally validated, naturally occurring B2 protein substrate to include an Ile residue at the penultimate position of the leader peptide, while several previously reported lasso peptide precursors carrying T(-2)I substitutions were still accepted as substrates from the processing machinery, albeit with lower turnover (Pan et al., 2012; Hegemann et al., 2013, 2014). In addition, a putative Ile(-2) residue was found in a lasso peptide BGC from Acidobacteriaceae bacterium TAA 166 (Tietz et al., 2017), and a number of bioinformatically predicted lasso peptide precursors with putative Ile/Val/Ala-2 residues were reported during the submission of this manuscript (Kretsch et al., 2023). Besides, our in-silico analyses of Acidobacteriaceae bacteria also helped to identify an array of other lasso peptide precursors containing penultimate isoleucine or valine residues in their leader peptide precursors (Figure 2; Supplementary Figure S14), suggesting that the leader peptide Ile/Val(-2) residue may be widely distributed in Acidobacteriaceae derived lasso peptides. In addition to Bradymonadales and Acidobacteriaceae, leader peptide Ile/Val(-2) residue is also observed in a list of Sphingomonadales derived lasso peptide precursors (Figure 2; Supplementary Figure S14). These analyses strongly indicated that the leader peptide Ile/Val(-2) residues are rare but not uncommon in lasso peptide precursors. The effects of Ile(-2) and the conserved YxxPxL motif on phosphorylation and leader peptide removal We were curious to know whether the leader peptide Ile(-2) residue in BsfA also plays a role in phosphorylation and leader peptide removal. This residue was targeted for replacement with other amino acids. Ile(-2) was first exchanged with the congener leucine residue in BsfA, which was then co-expressed with BsfB1 and BsfK. HPLC-ESI-HRMS analysis of the BsfA variant after purification and desalting revealed that only part of the precursor peptide was phosphorylated (Figure 5A), compared with the wild type BsfA where almost all the precursor was phosphorylated (Supplementary Figure S5). Most of the I(-2)V precursor peptide was phosphorylated, while in addition to the major monophosphorylated precursor, we detected a considerable amount of polyphosphorylated precursor peptides (Figure 6A), which were less detectable in wild type BsfA. Assays with the I(-2)L, I(-2)T, and I(-2)A variants of BsfA yielded similar results to the assay with BsfA I(-2)V (Figures 7A, 8A), implying that the penultimate residue in the leader peptide has a great influence on the degree of phosphorylation. Tandem MS analysis of BsfA I(-2)A after trypsin digestion identified Ser3 as the polyphosphorylated residue, which was corroborated by the observation that the BsfA I(-2A)&S3A variant could not be phosphorylated (Supplementary Figure S15; Supplementary Table S5). Polyphosphorylations on C-terminal serine residues were reported for ThcoK and SyanK (Zhu et al., 2016b), whereas our result pointed to (poly)phosphorylation on a ring residue of the lasso peptide. Figure 5(A) HPLC-ESI-HRMS analysis of phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)L purified from co-expression with BsfB1 and BsfK. (B)
In vitro characterization of TF-BsfB2 with phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)L. (A) HPLC-ESI-HRMS analysis of phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)L purified from co-expression with BsfB1 and BsfK. (B)
In vitro characterization of TF-BsfB2 with phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)L. Figure 6(A) HPLC-ESI-HRMS analysis of phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)V purified from co-expression with BsfB1 and BsfK. (B)
In vitro characterization of TF-BsfB2 with phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)V. (A) HPLC-ESI-HRMS analysis of phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)V purified from co-expression with BsfB1 and BsfK. (B)
In vitro characterization of TF-BsfB2 with phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)V. Figure 7(A) HPLC-ESI-HRMS analysis of phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)T purified from co-expression with BsfB1 and BsfK. (B)
In vitro characterization of TF-BsfB2 with phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)T. (A) HPLC-ESI-HRMS analysis of phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)T purified from co-expression with BsfB1 and BsfK. (B)
In vitro characterization of TF-BsfB2 with phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)T. Figure 8(A) HPLC-ESI-HRMS analysis of phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)A purified from co-expression with BsfB1 and BsfK. (B)
In vitro characterization of TF-BsfB2 with phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)A. (A) HPLC-ESI-HRMS analysis of phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)A purified from co-expression with BsfB1 and BsfK. (B)
In vitro characterization of TF-BsfB2 with phosphorylated BsfA I(-2)A. The BsfA Ile(-2) substitution variants were furthermore utilized for the characterization of TF-BsfB2 activity. In contrast to the wild type BsfA that was cleaved almost completely, I(-2)T as well as I(-2)A exchanges completely hindered the removal of the leader peptide even in the presence of BsfB1 (Figures 7B, 8B). In assays using the I(-2)L and I(-2)V exchange variants, barely any leader cleavage was observed either (Figures 5B, 6B). Very recently, RRE domains in lasso peptide biosynthesis were shown not only to deliver the precursor peptide to the leader peptidase, but also to partially compose the elusive S2 proteolytic pocket that binds the penultimate residue of the leader peptides. A critical tyrosine residue (Tyr33 in FusE) in these RRE domains is suspected to directly engage Thr(-2), perhaps via side chain H-bonding (Alfi et al., 2022; Kretsch et al., 2023). However, this is unlikely for the case of BsfB1, as the Ile(-2) residue does not contain polar groups for such kind of interactions. Sequence alignment reveals that BsfB1 also contains this tyrosine residue (Tyr37 in BsfB1), but this residue is not conserved in Bradymonadales derived B1 proteins (Supplementary Figure S16). The interaction between BsfB1 and the penultimate isoleucine residue in BsfA remains largely enigmatic and is worthy of further investigation. Thus, we speculate that the penultimate isoleucine residue in BsfA affects both BsfB1 and BsfB2, and that these proteins exhibit a new substrate selectivity for leader peptide binding and excision. Ala-replacements of Tyr(-17), Pro(-14), and Leu(-12) were also performed and tested for their effects on phosphorylation and leader peptide excision. The Y(-17)A and L(-12)A exchanges did not have any effect on the phosphorylation of BsfA, as the masses of unphosphorylated precursors are barely detected in HRMS analyses. Nevertheless, the P(-14)A variant precipitates immediately after addition to the BsfK assay, and no mass of the precursor is observed. Thus, double (Y(-17)A&P(-14)A) and triple (Y(-17)A&P(-14)A&L(-12)A) exchange variants of BsfA were generated. Surprisingly, neither the double nor the triple Ala substitution affects precursor phosphorylation (Supplementary Figure S17). Moreover, subsequent characterization of BsfB2 revealed that for all single and double substitution variants, the leader peptide were excised effectively, including the unstable P(-14)A variant. In contrast, the triple substitution variant was only partially cleaved (Supplementary Figure S18). We surmise that other residues in BsfA leader peptide in addition to Tyr(-17), Pro(-14), and Leu(-12) may interact with BsfB1 as well, whereas the possibility that protein–protein interactions of BsfB1/BsfK or BsfB1/BsfB2 facilitate the enzymatic activities needs to be further investigated in the future.