RESULTS Genome sequence revealed biosynthetic potential of Sorangium sp. So ce836 The So ce836 genome (GenBank accession: CP102233) has a size of 14,555,308 bp and encodes 10,611 genes, including 10,570 protein‐coding sequences. Analysis with the bioinformatic tool antiSMASH (version 6.1.1) (Blin et al., 2021) predicted a total of 45 BGC regions. Our detailed analysis of the BGC regions showed that four of these likely constituted several BGCs (see below), resulting in a total of 52 BGCs. Among these BGCs, only six showed close similarity (i.e. above 60% amino acid similarity) to BGCs with known natural products reported in the MIBiG database (Table S1) (Kautsar et al., 2019). Thirty BGCs encoded the syntheses of NRPs, PKs, or hybrids of these (Table S1). Predicted BGCs encompassed a total of 414 genes, comprising 4% of all protein‐coding sequences in So ce836, and 307 of these (74%; 81 core biosynthetic, 131 additional biosynthetic, 42 transport‐related, 53 regulatory) were associated with the production of NRPs and PKs. The antiSMASH output labelled different types of genes with different colours, which we also utilize throughout this manuscript (‘core biosynthetic’ in dark red, ‘additional biosynthetic’ in coral, ‘transport‐related’ in blue, and ‘regulatory’ in green). RNA sequencing identified temporal transcription patterns in a batch culture In a batch liquid culture incubated at 28°C with vigorous shaking, So ce836 grew with a minimum doubling time of 2.3 days (Figure 1). The exponential growth phase lasted from day 1 to 8, followed by a stationary phase and a death phase (Figure 1). FIGURE 1Growth curve of So ce836. The blue curve shows the growth of So ce836 over six time points (logistic curve y=L/1+e−kx−x0+b, with L=5.434,k=0.347,x0=4.225,b=26.083). The exponential phase (days 1–8) is indicated by the pink area and black dashed line. Each data point represents mean cell counts per mL on a logarithmic scale (five biological replicates per growth time with 10 technical replicates each). Error bars indicate the relative standard error of the mean. Growth curve of So ce836. The blue curve shows the growth of So ce836 over six time points (logistic curve y=L/1+e−kx−x0+b, with L=5.434,k=0.347,x0=4.225,b=26.083). The exponential phase (days 1–8) is indicated by the pink area and black dashed line. Each data point represents mean cell counts per mL on a logarithmic scale (five biological replicates per growth time with 10 technical replicates each). Error bars indicate the relative standard error of the mean. We analysed the time course of genome‐wide transcription in the So ce836 cultures by sequencing RNA from samples collected at five different time points: days 4, 7, 11, 14, and 21. These time points were selected on the basis of preliminary experiments to represent the phases of a full growth cycle. The transcription of 8311 genes (78% of all genes) varied significantly over the time‐course experiment, as indicated by a likelihood ratio test. These are referred to as ‘differentially expressed’ genes in the following text. In contrast, the transcription levels of 20% of all genes did not vary significantly between time points, and an additional 2% of genes were excluded from further analyses due to low read counts. To compare time courses of transcription between differentially expressed genes, we analysed deviations from the genes' mean transcription levels at five time points. We found that the timing of transcription varied widely, and k‐means clustering of these temporal patterns into five transcription groups clearly associated with maximal transcription at the different growth times (Figure 2) (initially, a hierarchical clustering approach had justified the grouping into five groups; not shown). Genes in transcription group 1 (2435 genes, 29% of differentially expressed genes) showed a tendency for maximal transcription on day 4, that is during early exponential growth (Figure 2). A majority of genes in transcription group 2 (1670 genes, 20%) were maximally transcribed on day 7 of the experiment, that is also during exponential growth (Figure 2). In contrast, transcription group 3 (1876 genes, 23%) contained genes that were strongly transcribed at the beginning of the stationary phase (day 11), and the transcription of genes in groups 4 (1100 genes, 13%) and 5 (1230 genes, 15%) peaked on days 14 and 21, respectively (Figure 2). Hence, in summary, transcription groups 1 and 2 mainly contained genes (totalling 39% of all genes) that reached their maximum transcription during exponential growth, whereas most genes in the other three transcription groups (3, 4, and 5; 40% of all genes) were maximally transcribed in later growth phases (Figure 2). FIGURE 2Temporal transcription patterns of 8311 differentially expressed genes in the So ce836 genome. The deviation from mean transcription (z‐scores) is plotted over growth time. A deviation value of 0 indicates that a gene is transcribed at its mean level calculated over all time points. A value of 2 indicates that transcription levels deviate from the mean by two standard deviations. The genes were grouped using k‐means clustering with a group size of five. The mean transcription of individual genes over time‐point replicates is plotted in grey and median values for the whole transcription group are plotted in blue with error bars indicating first and third quartiles. The pink‐shaded area indicates the exponential growth phase. Temporal transcription patterns of 8311 differentially expressed genes in the So ce836 genome. The deviation from mean transcription (z‐scores) is plotted over growth time. A deviation value of 0 indicates that a gene is transcribed at its mean level calculated over all time points. A value of 2 indicates that transcription levels deviate from the mean by two standard deviations. The genes were grouped using k‐means clustering with a group size of five. The mean transcription of individual genes over time‐point replicates is plotted in grey and median values for the whole transcription group are plotted in blue with error bars indicating first and third quartiles. The pink‐shaded area indicates the exponential growth phase. Analysis of temporal transcription supported the identification of individual BGCs Core biosynthetic genes within specific BGC regions commonly followed similar temporal transcription patterns (Figure 3, Figure S1), likely due to their organization in single, co‐transcribed operons (Fischbach & Walsh, 2006). However, a few BGC regions predicted by antiSMASH exhibited deviating transcription of their core genes over time, including BGC regions 7, 20, 25, and 41 (Figure S2). Closer inspection showed that each of these regions likely constituted several BGCs (Figure S3), since their BGC core genes were spatially separated or located on different DNA strands. Consequently, we split BGC region 7 into two subregions (7_1 and 7_2), corresponding to antiSMASH‐predicted core genes involved in the biosynthesis of resorcinol and a phenazine compound, respectively (Table S1). Similarly, BGC region 20 was split into three subregions (20_1 ‐ 20_3) and region 41 was split into two (41_1, 41_2). BGC subregion 41_1 was predicted to encode the biosynthesis of a redox‐cofactor and the other subregions are likely involved in the production of NRPs or NRP/PK‐hybrids (Table S1). We assigned genes other than core biosynthetic genes within overlapping regions to both BGC subregions (Figure S3). FIGURE 3Temporal transcription of core biosynthetic genes of NRP‐ and PK‐related BGCs. The deviation from mean transcription (z‐score) is plotted over growth time for each BGC associated with the production of NRPs, PKs, or their hybrids. Numbers in brackets indicate the number of differentially expressed core genes and the total number of core genes in the BGC, respectively. Each curve represents the time‐course of transcription of one core biosynthetic gene. Data points indicate the means over replicates at a time point and error bars represent the adjusted standard deviations. Differentially transcribed genes are represented in dark red, genes without a significant difference in transcription over the time‐course experiment in grey. The last panel shows the temporal transcription of 44 genes encoding ribosomal proteins for comparison. Pink shading indicates the exponential growth phase. Temporal transcription of core biosynthetic genes of NRP‐ and PK‐related BGCs. The deviation from mean transcription (z‐score) is plotted over growth time for each BGC associated with the production of NRPs, PKs, or their hybrids. Numbers in brackets indicate the number of differentially expressed core genes and the total number of core genes in the BGC, respectively. Each curve represents the time‐course of transcription of one core biosynthetic gene. Data points indicate the means over replicates at a time point and error bars represent the adjusted standard deviations. Differentially transcribed genes are represented in dark red, genes without a significant difference in transcription over the time‐course experiment in grey. The last panel shows the temporal transcription of 44 genes encoding ribosomal proteins for comparison. Pink shading indicates the exponential growth phase. Temporal transcription patterns did not always coincide with BGC boundaries, however. Region 25 included four spatially separated groups of BGC core genes (Figure S4), three of which encoded thioesterase at the C‐terminal ends of their last core gene, suggesting independent biosynthetic pathways within this region (Schwarzer & Marahiel, 2001). Subregion 25_3 represents the previously described epothilone BGC with a 100% protein similarity to MIBiG entries (BGC0000989–BGC0000991; Julien et al., 2000; Molnár et al., 2000; Tang et al., 2000; Zhu et al., 2013). Moreover, we indeed detected epothilone A production by So ce836 via LC/MS analysis (Figure 4B). Subregion 25_4 shares 62% similarity and an identical gene order with the glidopeptin BGC (MIBiG entry BGC0001608; Wang et al., 2018). While the separation of region 25 into several BGCs is therefore justified, temporal transcription patterns were largely identical for three of the four subregions (Figure S2). FIGURE 4Net production rates of icumazole A (A) and epothilone A (B), and transcription of core genes in the underlying BGCs. The images above the plots show the chemical structures of icumazole A (left, PubChem CID 101557675; https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Icumazole‐A) and epothilone A (PubChem CID 448799; https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Epothilone‐A). The upper panels (blue) represent the relative concentration of natural products as obtained from LC/MS analyses (HPLC based UV light at 304 nm, 15.27 min retention time for icumazole A; LC/MS mass peaks at 494.2571 m/z, 9.05 min retention time for epothilone A). Boxplots over five replicates per time point are shown. The curves were generated by monotone piecewise cubic interpolation over median concentrations. The second panels (green) show the net compound production rate per myxobacterial cell, based on the slope of the compound concentration per mL (blue curve) at a certain time point normalized by the mean cell count per mL at that time point. Error bars indicate propagated errors. The lower panels (red) represent the deviation from mean transcription (z‐scores) of core biosynthetic genes in the icumazole and epothilone BGCs, respectively (see also regions 19 and 25_3 in Figure 3). The zero‐line marks the mean transcription of a gene over all time points. Pink shading indicates the exponential growth phase. Net production rates of icumazole A (A) and epothilone A (B), and transcription of core genes in the underlying BGCs. The images above the plots show the chemical structures of icumazole A (left, PubChem CID 101557675; https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Icumazole‐A) and epothilone A (PubChem CID 448799; https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Epothilone‐A). The upper panels (blue) represent the relative concentration of natural products as obtained from LC/MS analyses (HPLC based UV light at 304 nm, 15.27 min retention time for icumazole A; LC/MS mass peaks at 494.2571 m/z, 9.05 min retention time for epothilone A). Boxplots over five replicates per time point are shown. The curves were generated by monotone piecewise cubic interpolation over median concentrations. The second panels (green) show the net compound production rate per myxobacterial cell, based on the slope of the compound concentration per mL (blue curve) at a certain time point normalized by the mean cell count per mL at that time point. Error bars indicate propagated errors. The lower panels (red) represent the deviation from mean transcription (z‐scores) of core biosynthetic genes in the icumazole and epothilone BGCs, respectively (see also regions 19 and 25_3 in Figure 3). The zero‐line marks the mean transcription of a gene over all time points. Pink shading indicates the exponential growth phase. The transcription of most core genes for NRP and PK biosyntheses peaked during exponential growth Among 307 genes from BGCs for NRP and PK production, 260 (85%) were differentially expressed over our time‐course experiment. This is a significant over‐representation compared to the number of differentially expressed genes among all genes (p‐value = 2.82e‐3 based on the hypergeometric distribution). A particularly large proportion of core biosynthetic genes (93%, 75 out of 81 core genes) were differentially expressed (p‐value = 4.88e‐4). The majority of differentially expressed core genes from BGCs for PK and NRP syntheses were maximally transcribed on day 7 (60%) or day 4 (20%) (Figures 3 and 5). Accordingly, 17 (23%) of the 75 differentially expressed core genes belonged to transcription group 1, and 44 (59%) to transcription group 2. This means a statistically significant over‐representation of core genes among the two groups, which both displayed a strong tendency for maximum transcription in the exponential growth phase (Figure 2, Table S2). Transport‐related genes and additional biosynthetic genes within BGCs often showed similar temporal trends of transcription as the core genes (Figures S5 and S6). In contrast, transcription of regulatory genes from these BGCs exhibited deviating temporal patterns (Figure S7). Of note, however, the smCOG‐based prediction of these accessory genes is less reliable than the rule‐based identification of core biosynthetic genes (Medema et al., 2011). Therefore, we focused on the latter for our further analyses. FIGURE 5Temporal distribution of maximal gene transcription of BGC core genes associated with NRP‐ and PK‐production. Out of 81 core genes from NRP‐ and PK‐related BGCs, 75 were differentially expressed in our experiment. This figure shows for each time point how many of the differentially expressed core genes were maximally transcribed at that time. Pink shading indicates the exponential growth phase. Temporal distribution of maximal gene transcription of BGC core genes associated with NRP‐ and PK‐production. Out of 81 core genes from NRP‐ and PK‐related BGCs, 75 were differentially expressed in our experiment. This figure shows for each time point how many of the differentially expressed core genes were maximally transcribed at that time. Pink shading indicates the exponential growth phase. For comparison, we plotted the temporal transcription of forty‐four genes encoding ribosomal proteins (Figure 3, Table S3). The transcription activity of most ribosomal protein genes also peaked during the exponential growth phase, but their temporal patterns nevertheless differed markedly from BGC core genes by showing additional transcription maxima on days 14 and 21 (Figure 3, Figure S8). Other BGC classes displayed more variable transcriptional patterns The So ce836 genome encodes 13 BGCs for potential RiPPs, six for terpenes, and one each for phosphonate, resorcinol, and phenazine compounds (Table S1). The core genes of these BGC classes showed more diverse temporal transcription patterns compared to NRP‐ and PK‐related BGCs (Figures S1, S9 and S10). From the 21 core genes of RiPP‐related BGCs, 15 were significantly differentially expressed and eight of these (53%) reached their maximal transcription level in the exponential phase (days 4 and 7) (Figure S1). The BGCs associated with the production of terpenes contain six core genes (Figure S9), only two of which were maximally transcribed in the exponential phase, whereas two reached their maximal transcription level in the death phase (at day 21). The resorcinol‐ and phenazine‐related BGCs are localized close to each other on the genome, but yet their temporal expression differed strongly, indicating different mechanisms of transcriptional regulation (Figure S10). So ce836 was also predicted to produce a phosphonate, encoded by BGC region 38. The corresponding core gene was most strongly expressed in the early exponential phase (day 4) and in the death phase (day 21). BGC core gene expression was correlated with metabolite net production rates Strain So ce836 produced large amounts of the natural compound icumazole A. The concentration of icumazole A, as measured by HPLC based on its absorption of UV light (304 nm, 15.27 min retention time), was maximal on day 11 and decreased thereafter, suggesting the compound was catabolized by the bacterium or otherwise degraded (Figure 4A, blue curve). We determined the net compound production rate (arbitrary units) at each time point by assessing the slope of the concentration curve and then related it to the concentration of bacterial cells in the culture at the same time point (as shown in Figure 1) to estimate the net compound production rate per cell. As a result, we found that the net icumazole A production rate per myxobacterial cell peaked on day 7, that is during exponential growth (Figure 4A, green curve). Strikingly, this net cellular icumazole A production rate correlated strongly with the transcriptional pattern of the 10 core genes from the icumazole BGC (r = 0.88; Xie et al., 2022), since the maximum deviation from mean transcription was also reached on day 7 (Figure 4A, red curves). At the same time, we also detected epothilones in the metabolome of So ce836. Epothilone A was only weakly detectable by UV absorption (250 nm, 9.05 min retention time) at most time points, and since quantification of epothilone A by UV absorption and mass spectroscopy gave similar results for days 4–14 (Figure S11), we relied on LC/MS mass peaks (494.2571 m/z, 9.05 min retention time) to estimate the relative concentration of epothilone A. Similar to icumazole A, the concentration of epothilone A in the growth medium was highest in the stationary phase (Figure 4B, blue curve). Again, the net cellular production rate of epothilone A was maximal on day 7, and it correlated with the time course of transcription of epothilone BGC core genes (r = 0.78) (Figure 4B, green and red curves). Taken together, we observed that bursts of BGC core gene transcription were accompanied by distinct surges in net production rates per cell for the two known compounds icumazole A and epothilone A. Even though temporal dynamics of normalized BGC core gene transcription and compound production rates were highly similar for these compounds (Figure 4), absolute transcription levels of the core genes (i.e. sequencing read counts per kilobase) differed more than 100‐fold between associated BGCs (Table S1, Figure S8). Notably at maximum transcription on day 7, the median number of normalized sequencing read counts mapped to the icumazole BGC core genes was 428 per kilobase (1732–12,799 reads per gene), and for the epothilone BGC was only 3 per kilobase (13–55 reads per gene) (Figure 6, Figure S8). And on day 4, when almost no icumazole A net production was detectable, the median number of sequencing reads mapped to icumazole BGC core genes was at its minimum of 15 per kilobase (55–399 reads per gene), but yet this number was larger than the maximal transcription level of the epothilone BGC core genes (Figure S8). The transcript levels of other BGCs were intermediate between those of epothilone and icumazole BGCs, except for four BGCs with slightly lower read counts than the epothilone BGC and five BGCs that had even higher read counts per kilobase than the icumazole BGC, although we were unable to detect their (as yet unknown) natural products (Figure 6, Table S1). FIGURE 6Distribution of BGC read counts on their day of maximal transcription. For each BGC core gene the mean read counts per kilobase after DESeq2 normalization was calculated over all replicates on the day of maximal BGC transcription. Plotted here is the median over all core genes in a BGC. Each type of BGC is represented in a different colour. The ‘other BGC types’ include resorcinol‐, phenazine‐, and phosphonate‐producing BGCs. Please note that the first two bins and the last one do not have the same range as the other bins. With maximally three reads per kilobase, the epothilone BGC is located in the left most bin. In contrast, the icumazole BGC had maximally 428 reads per kilobase. Distribution of BGC read counts on their day of maximal transcription. For each BGC core gene the mean read counts per kilobase after DESeq2 normalization was calculated over all replicates on the day of maximal BGC transcription. Plotted here is the median over all core genes in a BGC. Each type of BGC is represented in a different colour. The ‘other BGC types’ include resorcinol‐, phenazine‐, and phosphonate‐producing BGCs. Please note that the first two bins and the last one do not have the same range as the other bins. With maximally three reads per kilobase, the epothilone BGC is located in the left most bin. In contrast, the icumazole BGC had maximally 428 reads per kilobase. While the net cellular production rates of both icumazole A and epothilone A were maximal during exponential growth, the highest relative concentrations of the compounds were reached in later growth phases (Figure 4). This might be due to the accumulation of compounds over time and the large, metabolite‐producing biomass available in the batch culture towards the end of the experiment. COG categorization relates transcription groups to cellular functions To assess the temporal transcription in a genome‐wide context with respect to cellular function, we classified the proteins encoded in the So ce836 genome into Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG; Table S4) (Galperin et al., 2015). Out of 8311 differentially expressed genes, we could associate 6081 (73%) to COG categories using the eggNOG‐mapper (Cantalapiedra et al., 2021). We then performed an over‐/under‐representation analysis of COG categories within each of the five transcription groups (Table S5). Among genes in transcription group 1 (maximally transcribed on day 4, i.e. during early exponential growth), COG categories E (‘Amino acid transport and metabolism’), M (‘Cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis’) and F (‘Nucleotide transport and metabolism’) were significantly over‐represented compared to their distribution among all annotated and differentially expressed genes in So ce836 (for adjusted p‐values based on the hypergeometric distribution with subsequent multiple testing correction, see Table S5). In transcription group 2 (maximally transcribed on day 7), categories P (‘Inorganic ion transport and metabolism’), J (‘Translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis’), H (‘Coenzyme transport and metabolism’), and Q (‘Secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism’) were significantly over‐represented. Hence, the distribution of genes classified to COG category Q (‘Secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism’) confirmed our previous notion of BGC transcription mostly during exponential bacterial growth. In contrast, in transcription group 3 (maximally transcribed on day 11, i.e. during the early stationary phase), COG categories J, P, and E were significantly under‐represented, whereas category O (‘Posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones’) was over‐represented (although the latter was not statistically significant after correction for multiple testing; Table S5). In transcription group 5 (maximally transcribed on day 21), category G (‘Carbohydrate transport and metabolism’) was over‐represented.