Results Higher-Order Chromosome Organization in S. coelicolor. Since the expression levels of BGCs will dramatically change, accompanied by the transformation of different growth phases [i.e., almost silent before the mid-exponential phase (M phase) and high-expression after the late-exponential phase (L phase)] (33), to ensure whether the chromosome 3D organization will synchronously change to fit this biological procedure, we initially investigated the S. coelicolor genome organization during the M phase (14 h) and the L phase (22 h, SI Appendix, Fig. S1) in liquid R5- medium through Hi-C. The genome is divided into 5-kb bins, and interaction frequencies for each restriction fragment are assigned to corresponding bins. The normalized interaction frequencies are visualized as a two-dimensional matrix for M phase (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S2 A and B) and L phase (SI Appendix, Figs. S2 C and D and S3A). Some notable 3D features from Hi-C data are summarized. Fig. 1.Chromosome organization of S. coelicolor in M phase. (A) Normalized genomic contact map obtained from asynchronous population (14 h for M phase, R5- medium, 5-kb resolution). The x and y axes represent the genomic coordinates of the reference genome (S. coelicolor A3(2) strain M145, 8.67 Mb), and the color scale reflects the frequency of contacts between two genomic loci, from dark blue (rare contacts) to dark red (frequent contacts). The orange arrow indicates the region interacted with the whole chromosome in L phase. The horizontal axes in B to F represent the chromosomal position corresponding to A. (B) Top panel: Directional index analysis of the corresponding genomic regions. Downstream (red) and upstream (green) biases are indicated. Down panel: Identified CIDs are represented as blue triangles. Dotted gray vertical lines crossing A to F highlight the barriers between CIDs. (C) RNA-seq profile mapped onto S. coelicolor genome in 1-kb resolution. (D) Genomic annotations of 14 putative laterally acquired insertions (purple block, Top), six rRNA coding genes (light blue block, Middle), origin of replication (oriC, brown block, Middle), and 28 BGCs (red block, Down). (E) Genetic partition in S. coelicolor. Red rectangle for the 1.5 Mb left arm, blue rectangle for the 4.9 Mb core region, and yellow rectangle for the 2.3 Mb right arm. (F) 3D compartmentalization in S. coelicolor. The red and blue biases represent the A and B compartments in M phase, respectively. (G) The comparation of CIDs in M phase (Top) and L phase (Down). The identical CIDs are pointed out by bold lines and the identical CID boundaries are connected by dotted vertical gray lines. (H) Circos plots show the significant interaction among 16 CID boundaries (blue rectangle, Left) or 14 putative laterally acquired regions (purple rectangle, Right). The colors of circle correspond to the genetic partition in E. Each connection/arc represents a significantly enriched interaction. (I) 3D representation of the contact map from A. The chromosome is represented as a chain of beads (20 beads travel across pair of 5-kb bins; see Materials and Methods). The color of beads corresponds to the genetic partition in A, and the gray beads represent the telomeres of the chromosome. Chromosome organization of S. coelicolor in M phase. (A) Normalized genomic contact map obtained from asynchronous population (14 h for M phase, R5- medium, 5-kb resolution). The x and y axes represent the genomic coordinates of the reference genome (S. coelicolor A3(2) strain M145, 8.67 Mb), and the color scale reflects the frequency of contacts between two genomic loci, from dark blue (rare contacts) to dark red (frequent contacts). The orange arrow indicates the region interacted with the whole chromosome in L phase. The horizontal axes in B to F represent the chromosomal position corresponding to A. (B) Top panel: Directional index analysis of the corresponding genomic regions. Downstream (red) and upstream (green) biases are indicated. Down panel: Identified CIDs are represented as blue triangles. Dotted gray vertical lines crossing A to F highlight the barriers between CIDs. (C) RNA-seq profile mapped onto S. coelicolor genome in 1-kb resolution. (D) Genomic annotations of 14 putative laterally acquired insertions (purple block, Top), six rRNA coding genes (light blue block, Middle), origin of replication (oriC, brown block, Middle), and 28 BGCs (red block, Down). (E) Genetic partition in S. coelicolor. Red rectangle for the 1.5 Mb left arm, blue rectangle for the 4.9 Mb core region, and yellow rectangle for the 2.3 Mb right arm. (F) 3D compartmentalization in S. coelicolor. The red and blue biases represent the A and B compartments in M phase, respectively. (G) The comparation of CIDs in M phase (Top) and L phase (Down). The identical CIDs are pointed out by bold lines and the identical CID boundaries are connected by dotted vertical gray lines. (H) Circos plots show the significant interaction among 16 CID boundaries (blue rectangle, Left) or 14 putative laterally acquired regions (purple rectangle, Right). The colors of circle correspond to the genetic partition in E. Each connection/arc represents a significantly enriched interaction. (I) 3D representation of the contact map from A. The chromosome is represented as a chain of beads (20 beads travel across pair of 5-kb bins; see Materials and Methods). The color of beads corresponds to the genetic partition in A, and the gray beads represent the telomeres of the chromosome. First, both contact maps exhibit a solid and global main diagonal, which reflects the frequent local contacts resulting from interactions among adjacent loci. A secondary diagonal perpendicular to the main one extends from the origin of replication (oriC) adjacency to all rest regions of the chromosome, which shows the alignment of the two chromosomal arms (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S3A). The width and color saturability of the secondary diagonal are increasing over time, which indicates the considerable and gradual chromosomal compaction during growth phases shift (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). Some researchers have proved that the structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMCs) complexes, accompanying with ScpAB, loaded via ParB at parS sites adjacent to oriC, mediate chromosomal interarm contacts (11, 15, 17). As a most functionally conserved DNA-organizing protein among all domains of life (34–36), we assume the same protein complex is also responsible for the observed interarm contacts in S. coelicolor. Meanwhile, in both phases, general interaction signals are detected between the telomeres of the liner chromosome, except for terminal inverted repeats (TIRs) for which the sequencing signals have been eliminated (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S3A), and this is consistent with previous cytological evidence (37). Interactions among covalently bound terminal proteins mediate the association between the telomeres and make the chromosome exhibit genetic linkage, which would close the genetic map into a circle (38, 39). A similar character has also been independently demonstrated in S. venezuelae (17). Second, the self-interacting regions termed chromatin interaction domains (CIDs) previously described in B. subtilis and other species (2, 9, 11, 16) are also detected in S. coelicolor. Following the directional preference analysis method used in C. crescentus (9), 17 obvious CIDs are identified in M phase, ranging in length from 85 to 1,470 kb (510 kb on average, Fig. 1B), and 13 CIDs are identified in L phase, ranging from 220 to 1,470 kb (667 kb on average), respectively. (SI Appendix, Fig. S3B). Particularly, while only five intact CIDs are exactly the same, 10 boundaries remain, which indicates this dynamic process (split of a CID to smaller scale two or more and fusion of adjacent CIDs to larger scale one) (Fig. 1G). It suggests the adaptive dynamic adjustment during the growth phase transformation. CID boundaries with lower guanine and cytosine (G+C) content than the chromosomal average account for 93.8% (15 of 16) and 91.7% (11 of 12) in M phase and L phase, respectively. Additionally, G+C content of CID boundaries is statistically lower than the interior (SI Appendix, Fig. S5 B and E), which is similar to the cases in other species (11, 40, 41). In these locations, higher AT content might facilitate the formation of CID boundaries, for it has been previously documented that the DNA sequence component would influence its physical properties, such as DNA curvature, etc. Meanwhile, NAPs with AT content binding preference might maintain these barriers to some extent (40, 42, 43). Actually, numerous binding motifs of known transcription factors and NAPs are found within these boundaries (Dataset S1). To investigate the relationship between 3D structure and gene expression, we also sampled and sequenced the mRNA in cells culturing to both two growth phases and observed the dramatical difference between them (Fig. 1C and SI Appendix, Figs. S3C and S6). Meanwhile, we found that 50% (40 of 80) and 56.6% (30 of 53) genes in CID boundaries are highly expressed (within the top 30% of all genes in the genome) in M phase and L phase, respectively (Dataset S2), and the transcriptional strength of these genes within CID boundaries is higher than in the interior (SI Appendix, Fig. S5 C and F). Considerable parts of high-expression genes at CID boundary are correlated with substance and energy metabolism required for the growth and development of the cells (Dataset S2 and SI Appendix, Figs. S7 and S8). A high proportion of these highly expressed genes hold the same expression orientation with the direction of continuous replication [accounting for 77.5% (31 of 40) in M phase and 76.7% (23 of 30) in L phase, respectively, Dataset S2]. Together with the recent report on the interplay between elongating RNA polymerases (RNAPs) and condensin (44), these results hint that the evolution of the gene’s high expression is partly through the directional convergence between transcription and chromosomal replication. CID-bound but low-expression genes mainly code for the membrane protein, transcriptional regulator, and some postmodification genes for natural product biosynthesis, which are responsible for signal transduction as well as regulation of secondary metabolism (Dataset S2). Interestingly, only 40% (16 of 40) in M phase and 47.8% (11 of 23) in L phase of these genes share the same direction between transcription and chromosomal replication (Dataset S2), which indicates the directional convergence in another aspect. Significant interactions (Materials and Methods) among the CID boundaries are detected in M phase (Fig. 1H). However, these interactions are obviously decreased in L phase (reduced by 65% of the significant interaction number among the identical 10 CID boundaries, SI Appendix, Fig. S3H). A similar phenomenon occurs among 14 putative laterally acquired insertions through horizontal gene transfer (45) (reduced by 58% of the significant interaction number, Fig. 1 D and H and SI Appendix, Fig. S3 D and H). A putative regulatory mechanism that adapts to the transition of the metabolic situation may be implied by the colocalization and dispersion between these locations in different growth phases. According to the essentiality and persistence of genes, the genome of Streptomyces could be divided into a central core region, comprising genes with unconditionally essential and two terminal chromosomal arms with genes coding for dispensable function (45), which was called “genetic partition”. In S. coelicolor, the core region is approximately 4.9 Mb, with two uneven arms of 1.5 Mb (left arm) and 2.3 Mb (right arm) in length, separated by the first and last rRNA coding gene (45) (Fig. 1E). The concept of “chromosome compartments” was first proposed in eukaryote (7) and being a general term to measure the interactions among topologically associating domains (TADs). Two types of compartments, A and B, were classified based on their preferential interaction with each other (46, 47). Compartment A was characterized as transcriptionally active and open genomic regions (7); on the contrary, compartment B was associated with the silent expression regions such as nuclear lamina and nucleolar (48, 49). We compartmentalized the chromosome of S. coelicolor following the protocol of Zheng (50) and detected three independent compartments in both phases (Fig. 1F and SI Appendix, Fig. S3F). Compartment A extends from around 2.3 Mb to 6.2 Mb, giving two compartment B lengths of approximately 2.3 Mb (left-compartment B) and 2.4 Mb (right-compartment B) in M phase. The right-compartment B almost overlaps with the right arm, exhibiting the correlation between genetic partition and 3D compartmentalization. However, the left-compartment B is 0.8 Mb longer than the left arm (exceeding 56.7% of the left arm length), presenting the first case that the genetic partition is not well consistent with 3D compartmentalization. Only minor differences in 3D compartmentalization exist between L phase and M phase, which shows the relative stability of the large-scale chromosomal structure. The organization of chromosome 3D compartmentalization can be visualized by converting the contact map to a 3D topological diagram, where the whole left arm (red beads) and a small part of the core region (blue beads) together constructed left-compartment B (Fig. 1I and SI Appendix, Fig. S3I). Finally, we analyzed some abnormal lines in the contact matrix of L phase. The faint and cross-shaped line in 4.3 Mb exhibited the interaction between the ori region and the rest of the chromosome (SI Appendix, Figs. S2 C and D and S3A), and this signal may be covered by the significant long-range contact background in M phase. The separation and translocation of the ParB-oriC segregation complex along the nucleoid might be responsible for the phenomenon, consistent with the cases in C. crescentus (9) and C. glutamicum (15). This interaction intensity was almost the same as the average interaction frequency between bins separated in 2.0 Mb, which showed the physical proximity and relative insulation of the segregation complex and the nuclear region it passed by. We noticed the evident line located in 6.9 Mb, which means the global and apparent interaction between this region and the rest of the chromosome (SI Appendix, Figs. S2 C and D and S3A). It was even sharper and clearer than the one of 4.3 Mb. Interestingly, this region comprised three precursor supply genes (SCO6269 to SCO6271) for the synthesis of malonyl-CoA (51), the assembly unit for the polyketide synthase (PKS), and well-characterized regulation genes (SCO6265 to SCO6266) for γ-butyrolactone (GBL) signaling circuits, which hints the correlation between natural product biosynthesis and chromosomal interaction. Remodeling of Local Chromosome Organization Accompanying Nature Products’ Biosynthesis. The Streptomyces species are capable of synthesizing numerous natural products to achieve a competitive advantage in the complex soil environment. This progress generally starts at late-exponential and stationary phases. To understand the interplay between natural product biosynthesis and the rearrangement of local 3D chromosome organization during metabolic differentiation, we further examined the changes in local 3D organization and transcription of all 28 BGCs encoded in S. coelicolor genome in two growth phases (SI Appendix, Fig. S9 and Dataset S3). The results showed that 10 BGCs have significant changes at the transcription level and two BGCs have a synchronized obvious change in both aspects (Fig. 2 B and C and SI Appendix, Fig. S10). Fig. 2.The coordination between local chromosomal organization and transcription of BGCs. (A) The map of S. coelicolor chromosome with the same genetic partition as Fig. 1E. The relative location of dissected BGCs is represented by a black rectangle. (B and C) The different local Hi-C maps in the 2 kb resolution compare the contact enrichment in M phase versus L phase. The chromosomal ranges comprise the undecylprodigiosin BGC (Left) or coelimycin P1 (Right) and their 150-kb flanking regions, respectively. The color scale reflects the different contact frequency in two growth phases from dark blue (frequent contacts in L phase) to dark red (frequent contacts in M phase). The nested CIDs around red BGC are partly outlined by black lines, and the independent interactive domain covering cpk BGC is highlighted by a dark triangle. The orange arrow indicates the contact signal with the whole chromosome as SI Appendix, Fig. S3A. (D and E) The RNA-seq profile (reads per kilobase per million mapped reads, RPKM) of the single gene mapped onto the same S. coelicolor genome scope as B and C, respectively. The RNA-seq profiles in two growth phases are exhibited in mirror symmetry. The coordination between local chromosomal organization and transcription of BGCs. (A) The map of S. coelicolor chromosome with the same genetic partition as Fig. 1E. The relative location of dissected BGCs is represented by a black rectangle. (B and C) The different local Hi-C maps in the 2 kb resolution compare the contact enrichment in M phase versus L phase. The chromosomal ranges comprise the undecylprodigiosin BGC (Left) or coelimycin P1 (Right) and their 150-kb flanking regions, respectively. The color scale reflects the different contact frequency in two growth phases from dark blue (frequent contacts in L phase) to dark red (frequent contacts in M phase). The nested CIDs around red BGC are partly outlined by black lines, and the independent interactive domain covering cpk BGC is highlighted by a dark triangle. The orange arrow indicates the contact signal with the whole chromosome as SI Appendix, Fig. S3A. (D and E) The RNA-seq profile (reads per kilobase per million mapped reads, RPKM) of the single gene mapped onto the same S. coelicolor genome scope as B and C, respectively. The RNA-seq profiles in two growth phases are exhibited in mirror symmetry. In all BGCs of S. coelicolor genome, undecylprodigiosin (red) BGC has been extensively studied in previous works (52, 53). This red pigment enables quick visual discrimination of mutations that affect its production, partly making S. coelicolor the model strain for the genus among thousands of isolated Streptomyces species (54). In the results, the transcriptional level of the red cluster increased by 143 times from M phase to L phase (Fig. 2D and Dataset S3). It is accompanied by the relocation of the BGC between two nested domains (Fig. 2B) analyzed by the directional index method, which has been developed in other organisms to help define the CID hierarchical organizations (9). The arising and dissipating of nested domains and topological barriers may be an adaptive dynamic change to different growth conditions or reflect the heterogeneity within the population (11, 55). Similar observations have recently been reported in S. ambofaciens, in which the high transcriptional expression of a 29-kb BGC corresponds to the formation of an additional sharp boundary after culturing for 48 h (16). BGC of coelimycin P1 (cpk) is responsible for producing a yellow-colored alkaloid compound under specific fermentation conditions (56). The transcriptional strength of this BGC is dramatically increased 541-fold from M phase to L phase (Fig. 2E and Dataset S3). Intriguingly, a newly formed independent interactive domain spanning through the whole cluster was observed in L phase (Fig. 2C and SI Appendix, Fig. S3G). It is similar to the case in the eukaryotes species Arabidopsis thaliana, where the thalianol BGC will form different kinds and scales of cluster-associated interactive domains accompanying the activation or silence of it (57), which could suggest a comparable characteristic of 3D regulation mechanism between the prokaryote and eukaryote. Meanwhile, this independent topological structure coincided with the particular DNA region in the 6.9-Mb loci, which extensively interacted with the whole chromosome, hinting an associated biological procedure for secondary metabolism. Taken together, we focused on the synchronized variation between the local chromosomal structure of different BGCs and their expression level in different growth phases and found two typical cases. One generates a new nested domain boundary and the other forms an independent topological domain, and both cases coincide with the significant enhancement in transcription. These results emphasize the close correlation between the transcription of secondary metabolite gene clusters and their local 3D structure in our experimental conditions. The Local Chromosomal Interaction Frequency Can Prominently Influence the Expression Level of Endogenous and Exogenous Genes. We next investigated how the local chromatin organization would affect the expression of embedded genes. “FIRE score” was used to normalize the total raw local cis contacts for each bin in a 200-kb scale in eukaryotes (30). Superenhancers and human tissue-specifically expressed genes were enriched in such regions with high FIRE scores (30). Similarly, we calculated the “FIRE value” (Dataset S4) using minor modified methods (Materials and Methods). This value and transcription profile were plotted along the genome at 5-kb resolution (Fig. 3 A and B). The obvious correlation [Pearson correlation (PC) = 0.72, 0.65 in M phase and L phase, respectively] between the two signals pinpoints the underlying links between gene expression and local chromosomal interaction frequency. Fig. 3.The relativity between the expression of endogenous or exogenous genes with local chromosomal interaction frequency. (A and B) The correlation between the transcription of endogenous gene and local chromosomal interaction frequency in 5-kb resolution for M phase (A) and L phase (B). The contact between each bin and its 200-kb region upstream and downstream (FIRE signal, blue curve) accompanying with associated transcription profile (RNA sequencing signal, red curve) were plotted along the genome. (C and D) The relative location of selected HCR windows in the genome for M phase (C) and L phase (D). The color of chromosome corresponds to the genetic partition in Fig. 1E. The black triangles represent the locations of the inserted reporter gene within HCRs. (E and F) The correlation between the expression of exogenous reporter gene with local chromosomal interaction frequency in M phase (E) and L phase (F). The horizontal axis represents the FIRE value of HCR, and the vertical axis represents the expression strength of reporter gene. Each point from right to left represents HCR-M1 to M10 (E) or HCR-L1 to L10 (F), respectively. The numbers above each point mean the ratio of expression strength between each HCR and attB site integrated control indicated by a red line. The error bars are 1 SD. The image embedded in the penal indicates the color of fermentation broth in two phases. The relativity between the expression of endogenous or exogenous genes with local chromosomal interaction frequency. (A and B) The correlation between the transcription of endogenous gene and local chromosomal interaction frequency in 5-kb resolution for M phase (A) and L phase (B). The contact between each bin and its 200-kb region upstream and downstream (FIRE signal, blue curve) accompanying with associated transcription profile (RNA sequencing signal, red curve) were plotted along the genome. (C and D) The relative location of selected HCR windows in the genome for M phase (C) and L phase (D). The color of chromosome corresponds to the genetic partition in Fig. 1E. The black triangles represent the locations of the inserted reporter gene within HCRs. (E and F) The correlation between the expression of exogenous reporter gene with local chromosomal interaction frequency in M phase (E) and L phase (F). The horizontal axis represents the FIRE value of HCR, and the vertical axis represents the expression strength of reporter gene. Each point from right to left represents HCR-M1 to M10 (E) or HCR-L1 to L10 (F), respectively. The numbers above each point mean the ratio of expression strength between each HCR and attB site integrated control indicated by a red line. The error bars are 1 SD. The image embedded in the penal indicates the color of fermentation broth in two phases. To further verify the causality between gene expression and local chromosomal interaction frequency, we inserted a β-glucuronidase-encoding reporter gene gus(a) into a series of chromosomal positions with the following selected criteria. Each of the 11 continuous 5-kb bins constituted a window, and the PC between the FIRE value and associated transcription profile in each window was measured independently (Dataset S4). We set PC = 0.8 as the threshold, and these windows with PC ≥ 0.8 were defined as high correlative regions (HCRs). These HCRs were then sorted from high to low by the average FIRE value of the comprised eleven 5-kb bins. The difference between the highest and lowest FIRE value in HCRs was equally allocated to achieve a series of standard aliquots, and 10 HCRs with the lowest deviated FIRE value compared with the standard one would be selected for further investigation (Fig. 3 C and D and SI Appendix, Table S1). These twenty selected windows were named “HCR-MN” and “HCR-LN” for M phase and L phase, respectively (N = 1 to 10). In this study, the expression of gus(a) was under the control of a constitutive promoter ermEp1*, derived from the most used promoter ermEp for Streptomyces (58). To prevent the potential transcriptional read-through with adjacent genes, two bidirectional fd-phage terminators (59) enable up to 85% transcriptional isolation efficiency in Streptomyces (28) were set flanking the ermEp1*-gus(a), and their opposite direction avoids the possible elimination by homologous recombination (SI Appendix, Fig. S11B). Then the reporter cassette was introduced into each HCR-MN and HCR-LN window using Zeng’s protocol (60). To maximally prevent the potential interference between the gus(a) cassette and local genes, the reporter cassette was preferred to be inserted in the opposite orientation between two operons with the same transcriptional direction (SI Appendix, Fig. S11A). After culturing to a specific growth phase, the cells were sampled to measure the activity of β-glucuronidase, and an optimized measuring and calculation method based on Myronovskyi’s case (31) was adopted to minimize the intergroup deviation. The FIRE value of HCRs and β-glucuronidase activity in both growth phases were highly correlative (Fig. 3 E and F. PC = 0.98, P-value = 3.23e−7 in M phase and PC = 0.97, P-value = 5.75e−6 in L phase), which meant the local chromosomal interaction frequency could significantly influence the expression level of the comprised single gene. The highest activity in HCR-M1 was about 22 times higher than HCR-M10 in M phase, and the difference between HCR-L1 and HCR-L10 was as significant as 13 folds. To measure the potential application value of our study, a control strain was constructed with the same reporter cassette integrated into the ϕC31 attB site (61) (SI Appendix, Fig. S11C), a most used heterologous gene expression method in a broad range of Streptomyces species. As a result, in M phase, the β-glucuronidase activity in four windows (HCR-M1–M4) was higher than the attB control, and the highest activity in HCR-M1 was 1.95 times higher. While in two windows (HCR-M5 and M6) was almost equal to the attB control, and in the rest four windows was lower than it (Fig. 3E). In L phase, four windows (HCR-L1–L4) had higher, and six windows (HCR-L5–L10) had lower β-glucuronidase activity than the attB control. The highest activity in HCR-L1 was 1.92 times higher than the control (Fig. 3F). Together, we found that the transcriptional strength of endogenous genes was highly correlated with local chromosomal interaction frequency, which was quantified as the FIRE value in this study. Furthermore, the exogenous gus(a) reporter gene cassette was inserted into a series of HCRs with gradient FIRE value, and the measured β-glucuronidase activity was highly correlated with the FIRE value in both growth phases, which verified the local chromosomal interaction frequency could evidently affect the expression of the located gene. Exogenous Natural Product Can Achieve Higher Production When the BGC Engineered into HCRs with a Higher FIRE Value. Numerous strategies have been proposed and applied to activate the silent BGCs or increase the production of well-performing natural products (20, 62, 63). They were dominantly deliberated and manipulated at the one-dimensional sequence level. Inspired by the promising results from a single reporter gene and further verifying the feasibility of enhancing the production of target BGC according to the three-dimensional feature, an 11.8-kb exogenous BGC candidate for natural product RK-682 biosynthesis was integrated into the attB site of S. coelicolor (SI Appendix, Fig. S11D). The entire RK-682 BGC contains nine genes organized into two operons and produces a tetronate compound (Fig. 4A), a potent inhibitor of protein phosphatases and HIV-1 proteinase (32, 64). Fig. 4.The correlation between the production of RK-682 and local chromosomal interaction frequency. (A) The chemical structure of RK-682 and its BGC (yellow arrows). (B) LC–ESI–HRMS analysis of RK-682. Two peaks corresponding to RK-682 are due to complexation with divalent metal ions. (C and D) The correlation between RK-682 production with local chromosomal interaction frequency in M phase (C) and L phase (D), respectively. Each point from right to left represents HCR-M1 to M10 (C) or HCR-L1 to L10 (D), respectively. The numbers above each point mean the ratio of RK-682 production between each HCR and attB site integrated control indicated by a red line. The error bars are 1 SD. The correlation between the production of RK-682 and local chromosomal interaction frequency. (A) The chemical structure of RK-682 and its BGC (yellow arrows). (B) LC–ESI–HRMS analysis of RK-682. Two peaks corresponding to RK-682 are due to complexation with divalent metal ions. (C and D) The correlation between RK-682 production with local chromosomal interaction frequency in M phase (C) and L phase (D), respectively. Each point from right to left represents HCR-M1 to M10 (C) or HCR-L1 to L10 (D), respectively. The numbers above each point mean the ratio of RK-682 production between each HCR and attB site integrated control indicated by a red line. The error bars are 1 SD. To simplify the heterologous expression system and avoid the native regulation to the endogenous promoter PactII-orf4 (65), the two native operons (rkA-G and rkH-I) of RK-682 BGC were fused into one under the control of one promoter ermEp1* and sandwiched by two fd-phage terminators. This recombinant BGC cassette was embedded into an integrative plasmid (SI Appendix, Fig. S11F) and showed no obvious production difference from the native one under the same fermentation conditions. Then the RK-682 BGC cassette was introduced into the same HCR windows as the gus(a) reporter cassette (Fig. 3 C and D and SI Appendix, S11E and Table S1). The production of RK-682 compound for each mutant was then detected by LC-ESI-HRMS (Fig. 4B). The results showed that the FIRE value in HCRs and RK-682 production were also highly correlated in both growth phases (Fig. 4 C and D, PC = 0.94, P-value = 6.06e−5 in M phase and PC = 0.90, P-value = 3.61e−4 in L phase), which further emphasized the influence of local chromosomal interaction frequency on the expression of the embedded gene or even whole BGC. Interestingly, different from the apparent linear correlation between the β-glucuronidase activity and FIRE value in HCRs, the BGC case was curvilinear in both phases. We speculate that it might be caused by the different characteristics of final products and the associated different detection methods of the two cases. In the case of a single reporter gene, the transcription, translation, catalyzation of sufficient substrate, and the measure index were linear variations. However, in the BGC case, the production of RK-682 needs the participation of a series of enzymes with different catalytic efficiencies, and the complex biosynthesis model, together with potential precursor competing and quorum sensing, may synergistically contribute to the curvilinear correlation. The highest RK-682 production in HCR-M1 was about 15 times higher than that in HCR-M10 in M phase, and this difference between HCR-L1 and HCR-L10 even reached 30 folds. Compared with the conventional attB integration method, in M phase, the RK-682 production in five windows (HCR-M1–M5) was found to be higher, while in four windows (HCR-M7–M10) was lower than the attB control site, except that it was almost equal in HCR-M6. The highest production in HCR-M1 could reach 4.36 folds enhancement compared with the control (Fig. 4C). In L phase, two windows (HCR-L1 and L2) had higher RK-682 production than the attB control while eight (HCR-L3–L10) had lower production. The highest production in HCR-L1 was 1.37 times higher than the control (Fig. 4D). Collectively, the heterologous RK-682 BGC was engineered into each HCR window, and the production of RK-682 was also highly correlated with FIRE value in both growth phases, ensuring our scenario again. Compared with the attB integration control, the increased RK-682 production in some HCR windows with a high FIRE value suggests the application’s potential to increase the production of natural products.