RESULTS   Site-directed Mutagenesis To investigate the reaction mechanism of FlK, mutants of FlK were created at residues Thr42, Glu50, and His76, candidates for the catalytic triad in the FlK protein. To assess the involvement of these residues in the catalytic mechanism, the activities of the mutants were assayed and compared with that of WtFlK. Four mutants of the FlK protein carrying single amino acid mutations (T42S, T42A, E50A, and H76D, respectively) were cloned in pET28a(+) and overexpressed in E. coli RosettaTM (DE3)pLysS cells as His-tagged proteins. All proteins were purified by Co2+-charged His-Bind resin (Novagen) followed by gel filtration. Both WtFlK and T42SFlK were expressed as soluble proteins with a yield of over 10 mg from 1 liter of culture. T42AFlK and E50AFlK mutants yielded only 2 mg of soluble enzyme/liter of culture, although their expression levels were comparable with those of WtFlK and T42SFlK. During storage at 4 °C T42SFlK and T42AFlK also showed a much higher tendency to aggregate than WtFlK. The recombinant H76DFlK protein expressed in E. coli was completely insoluble, so it was not used for further studies. All of the mutations seemed have disturbed protein folding, with the H76D mutant being the most affected. The molecular weights of the purified proteins were determined by liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry. Retention times on gel filtration through a Superdex S200 column indicate that purified WtFlK and the T42AFlK, T42SFlK, and E50AFlK mutants are all dimers. The enzymatic characterization of WtFlK using FAcCoA as substrate has been reported previously (7). The present study demonstrated that replacing the Thr42 with Ala42 in FlK abolishes the enzyme activity, supporting our hypothesis that the Thr42-Oγ1 may act as the catalytic nucleophile that attacks the carbonyl thioester carbon of FAcCoA to initiate the hydrolysis reaction. Not surprisingly, T42SFlK is still able to hydrolyze FAcCoA with a kcat/Km value of 27.3 mm−1 s−1, which is about 19 times higher than that for WtFlK (1.47 mm−1 s−1), and a relatively smaller Km value (15 μm, 50% lower than that for WtFlK (30 μm)). It is noteworthy that T42SFlK activity was inhibited at a substrate concentration above 12 μm. These results suggest that the Ser42-Oγ in T42SFlK is able to carry out the nucleophilic attack and that the absence of the Thr42-Cγ in the T42S mutant may have led to decreased ability to ensure correct substrate binding, resulting in the substrate inhibition. The kcat/Km value of E50AFlK (0.54 mm−1 s−1) is only 37% of that for WtFlK, whereas the Km (206 μm) is much higher than that for WtFlK. E50AFlK also exhibited substrate inhibition when the FAcCoA concentration was above 19 μm, suggesting that Glu50 plays an important role in substrate recognition (Table 1). Comparison of wild-type and mutant FlK Enzyme reactions were carried out using FAcCoA as the substrate. Errors quoted represent the S.E. of curve fitting (Lineweaver-Burk plot). Each data point is the average of four (WtFlK), three (T42SFlK), or two E50AFlK measurements. Protein Soluble protein kcata Km kcat/Kmb FAcCoA concentration above which substrate inhibition was observed. mg/liter s−1 μm mm−1s−1 μm. WtFlK ∼10–12 0.044 ± 0.001 30 ± 1.3 1.47 ± 0.10. T42SFlK ∼10–12 0.409 ± 0.159 15 ± 1.2 27.3 ± 12.8 12. T42AFlK ∼2. E50AFlK ∼2 0.111 ± 0.041 206 ± 67 0.54 ± 0.37 19. a The units are number of CoA released/s/enzyme molecule. b The error values given for kcat/Km are calculated from the sum of the relative errors on values in the numerator and denominator. FlK Crystal Structure Determination In order to understand the catalytic mechanism of FlK, in particular how FlK distinguishes between FAcCoA and the structurally very similar AcCoA, 10 crystal structures of WtFlK, T42SFlK, and T42AFlK with or without various ligands were determined. The WtFlK structures were solved in the apo-form and in complex with either the substrate analogue AcCoA or the substrate fragment analogues FAcCPan and FAcOPan, the product FAc, or the product analogue Ac. Although attempts to crystallize T42S and T42A mutants in their apo-forms failed, crystals of T42SFlK in complex with Ac, FAc, or AcCoA and T42AFlK with bound FAc were obtained, and their structures were solved. Overall Fold and Oligomeric Association of FlK The crystals of FlK diffracted at resolutions between 2.35 and 1.5 Å and belong to space group C2 or P21 with two, four, or eight FlK molecules in the asymmetric unit, depending on the nature of the complex. Those complexes that crystallized in C2 (WtFlK·Ac, WtFlK·FAc, T42SFlK·Ac, T42SFlK·FAc, and T42AFlK·FAc) have a dimer in the asymmetric unit with a local 2-fold symmetry axis. The crystals in P21 have either dimers (two in T42SFlK·AcCoA and apo-SeMet WtFlK) in the asymmetric unit, also with local 2-fold symmetry, or two tetramers (WtFlK·FAcCPan and WtFlK·FAcOPan) with orthogonal 2-fold axes giving 222 pseudosymmetry (Fig. 1, A and B). Operation of the crystallographic 2-fold axis on the dimers in the asymmetric unit in space group C2 generates a tetramer, identical to that observed in the WtFlK·FAcPan or WtFlK·FAcOPan crystal structures. The observation that these crystal structures contain discrete tetramers suggests that the protein may have dimer-tetramer equilibrium in solution in which tetramers predominate at high concentrations. FIGURE 1.Overall structure of FlK depicted in a schematic representation. A, structure of WtFlK dimer. The two protomers of the dimer are shown in green and orange, respectively. B, tetrameric structure (dimer of dimers) of WtFlK in complex with the substrate analogue FAcCPan. The FAcCPan molecule is shown as sticks. The two protomers of the dimer on the top are indicated in green and orange, respectively. A red/blue color scheme is used for the dimer at the bottom. Overall structure of FlK depicted in a schematic representation. A, structure of WtFlK dimer. The two protomers of the dimer are shown in green and orange, respectively. B, tetrameric structure (dimer of dimers) of WtFlK in complex with the substrate analogue FAcCPan. The FAcCPan molecule is shown as sticks. The two protomers of the dimer on the top are indicated in green and orange, respectively. A red/blue color scheme is used for the dimer at the bottom. The protomer of FlK has a hot dog fold that comprises a five-strand antiparallel β-sheet (the bun) wrapping around a central α-helix (the sausage) (Fig. 1A). The hot dog fold was first observed for the structure of β-hydroxydecanoyl thiol ester dehydratase (12). A diverse range of enzymes with distinct catalytic activities has been found to have this fold. Thioesterases are important members of the hot dog superfamily and include 4-hydroxybenzoyl-CoA thioesterases from Pseudomonas sp. CBS-3 (29) and from Arthrobacter sp. SU (30), Escherichia coli thioesterases II (13), and acyl-CoA thioesterases YciA from Hemophilus influenzae (HI0827) (31). Despite the conserved hot dog fold, these thioesterases share a very low degree of identity at amino acid sequence level. The FlK asymmetric unit contains a dimer with pseudosymmetry about a 2-fold axis as observed previously in the structure of 4-hydroxybenzoyl-CoA thioesterase from Pseudomonas sp. (29). and (R)-specific enoyl-CoA hydratase from Aeromonas caviae (32). Most other thioesterases with the hot dog fold form tetramers, although hexameric structures have also been observed (31, 33). The main contacts between the two protomers in the FlK dimer are through strand 2 (residues 70–76) of the two protomers. The β-strands of the two protomers form together a 10-strand β-sheet with the putative active site at the interface between the protomers. A disulfide bond formed by their respective Cys73 residues covalently connects the two subunits. Wrapping around the disulfide bond are the Ile72 and the Val74 from both protomers with their side chains within hydrophobic interaction distance of each other. The Cγ2 of the putative catalytic Thr42 also makes a hydrophobic contact with Ile72-Cγ2 of the partner protomer. All of these interactions contribute to bringing the two protomers together. Furthermore, there are two salt bridges formed between the two protomers; the Lys21-Nζ interacts with the Glu29-Oϵ2, and Lys135-Nζ interacts with the carboxyl Oδ2 groups of Asp111 and Asp108 in the partner protomer. Hydrogen bonds formed by Ser30-Oγ and Glu32-Oϵ1 with Trp51-Nϵ1, Gly43-N with Glu50-Oϵ2 through a water molecule, and Tyr27-OH with Phe44-O also serve to stabilize the FlK dimer. The contact area between two protomers is ∼1750 Å2, corresponding to 30% of the accessible surface area of each protomer, suggesting strong interactions between them. These observations have led us to assume that the minimal active unit of FlK is a dimer. The tetrameric structure observed for WtFlK·FAcCPan is formed by a dimer of dimers with pseudo 222 symmetry (Fig. 1B). The main interaction regions are the 10-strand β-sheets present in the dimers, which are positioned back to back. Non-polar interactions predominate, but additionally there are some water-mediated hydrogen bonds. Similar tetramers have been observed in other thioesterases (13, 30, 34, 35). The contact area between two dimers is ∼3300 Å2, corresponding to about 30% of the total solvent-accessible area of each dimer, further suggesting the possibility of an equilibrium between dimers and tetramer in solution. The Active Site Consistent with the results of the site-directed mutagenesis of FlK described above, the crystal structure of apo-form WtFlK shows that side chains of the candidate catalytic residues Thr42 and His76 in one protomer and that of Glu50 from the adjacent protomer cluster between the dimer interface into the region between the “bun” and the “sausage” (Fig. 2, A and B). As expected, the Oγ1 of Thr42 and the Nδ1 of His76 are within hydrogen bonding distance (2.74 Å). To our surprise, we observed that the carboxylic group of Glu50 is located on the opposite side of Thr42, where it cannot have any direct contact with His76. However, a water molecule (Wat1) is in a perfect position to form a hydrogen bond with the Nδ2 of His76 (2.79 Å). This water molecule is conserved in the crystal structures of wild-type and mutant FlK with or without bound ligands. Although this observation was unexpected, it is in good agreement with our site-directed mutagenesis results. A water molecule replacing the acidic residue in this type of catalytic triad was also found in the HAV-3C gene product, an α-chymotrypsin-like protease produced by the hepatitis A picornavirus (36). The Thr42-His76-Wat1 network is further stabilized by a hydrogen bond between Wat1 and Thr80 side chain hydroxyl and another conserved water molecule (Wat2) that also forms a hydrogen bond with the Phe40-N. Around the His76-Wat1-Thr80/Wat2 network, the side chains from Val39, Phe40, Ala78, Ala79, and Ile113 form a hydrophobic shield, protecting the network from attack by solvent molecules. Based on our structural evidence, we now propose that the catalytic triad in FlK comprises Thr42-His76-water (Fig. 2A), located at the interface between two protomers with two active sites in each FlK dimer (Fig. 2B). FIGURE 2.Catalytic center of FlK. A, the catalytic triad of FlK is composed of Thr42, His76 (shown as sticks), and a conserved water molecule (Wat) (shown as a sphere). Green and orange colors indicate the two protomers of the dimer, respectively. B, the catalytic triad is located at the dimer interface. The electron density map used was 2Fo − 2Fc. Catalytic center of FlK. A, the catalytic triad of FlK is composed of Thr42, His76 (shown as sticks), and a conserved water molecule (Wat) (shown as a sphere). Green and orange colors indicate the two protomers of the dimer, respectively. B, the catalytic triad is located at the dimer interface. The electron density map used was 2Fo − 2Fc. Substrate Binding Pocket Although attempts to co-crystallize FlK with FAcCoA, CoA, or pantothenic acid failed, we successfully obtained crystals of T42SFlK with bound AcCoA and WtFlK in complex with two analogues of fluoroacetyl-pantetheine, FAcCPan, and FAcOPan. The sulfur atom of the thioester is replaced by a methylene in FAcCPan and by an oxygen atom in FAcOPan (Fig. 3). Comparison of the electron density maps of the crystals obtained from co-crystallization of WtFlK with FAc and CoA indicates that only FAc was bound. Comparisons of the structure of WtFlK without bound ligand with those of WtFlK·FAcCPan, WtFlK·FAcOPan, and T42SFlK·AcCoA have provided interesting insights into the structural basis of substrate recognition by FlK. FIGURE 3.Active sites of ligand-bound FlK with 2Fo − 2Fc electron density map for T42SFlK·AcCoA (A), WtFlK·FAcCPan (B), and WtFlK·FAcOPan (C). The molecules of AcCoA, FAcCPan, and FAcOPan are all shown in a deep purple color. Green and orange colors indicate residues from the two protomers of the dimer. Active sites of ligand-bound FlK with 2Fo − 2Fc electron density map for T42SFlK·AcCoA (A), WtFlK·FAcCPan (B), and WtFlK·FAcOPan (C). The molecules of AcCoA, FAcCPan, and FAcOPan are all shown in a deep purple color. Green and orange colors indicate residues from the two protomers of the dimer. In the ligand-free WtFlK crystal structure, three well conserved water molecules (designated Wat3, Wat4, and Wat5) mediate a hydrogen bonding network linking Thr42 and Gly43 in one protomer to Glu50, Arg120, and Gly69 in the neighboring protomer; Wat3 links the Gly43-N with the Glu50-Oϵ2, and Wat4 and Wat5 are within hydrogen bonding distance of each other and of the Thr42-N and Gly69-N, respectively. The Arg120-NH1 joins the network by salt bridging with Glu50-Oϵ1 and hydrogen bonding with Wat5. Converting Arg120 to Ala120 yielded completely insoluble protein, as did converting Glu50 to Ala50, suggesting the importance of these interactions in maintaining the correct protein folding and/or the correct architecture of the active site cavity. In the T42SFlK·AcCoA complex, the AcCoA is sandwiched between the long β-sheet and residues 17–42 that form two small α-helices (Fig. 4B). However, only the acetyl and β-mercaptoethylamine moieties from acetyl-CoA are buried in the protein, whereas the pantothenic acid and the 3′-phosphoryl-ADP are exposed to solvent, allowing considerable flexibility (Fig. 4, A and B). Three of the four protomers present in the asymmetric unit have a bound AcCoA, and in one of them, it was possible to fit the complete molecule, despite the poor electron density for the 3′-phosphoryl-ADP moiety, possibly due to the high flexibility in the solvent. The overall structure of FlK does not change significantly as a result of the T42S point mutation and the binding of AcCoA, but the AcCoA has forced Wat4 and Wat5 out of the active site cavity. The acetyl methyl group of the AcCoA occupies the position of Wat5, and the thioester carbonyl oxygen interacts via a hydrogen bond to Ser42-N. The orientations of the three bound AcCoA molecules at the active site are significantly different, reflecting a dynamic AcCoA-FlK interaction process and the flexibility of the substrate binding site. The acetyl carbonyl carbons of the three bound AcCoA molecules are all in the wrong orientation with respect to Oγ of Ser42 to allow nucleophilic attack. This explains the inability of FlK to hydrolyze AcCoA and implies that the presence of the fluorine in FAcCoA is crucial for substrate recognition. FIGURE 4.Overall structure of T42SFlK in complex with AcCoA. The two protomers of the T42SFlK dimer are represented in green and orange colors, respectively. A, 2Fo − 2Fc electron density map shows that AcCoA is bound between two protomers of the active FlK dimer. B, AcCoA is sandwiched between the long β-sheet and two small α-helices formed by residues 17–42. The long β-sheet and two small α-helices of protomer A and B are shown in light blue and light purple, respectively. C, representation of the molecular surface shows that only the acetyl and β-mercaptoethylamine moieties from AcCoA are buried in the active site of the protein. Overall structure of T42SFlK in complex with AcCoA. The two protomers of the T42SFlK dimer are represented in green and orange colors, respectively. A, 2Fo − 2Fc electron density map shows that AcCoA is bound between two protomers of the active FlK dimer. B, AcCoA is sandwiched between the long β-sheet and two small α-helices formed by residues 17–42. The long β-sheet and two small α-helices of protomer A and B are shown in light blue and light purple, respectively. C, representation of the molecular surface shows that only the acetyl and β-mercaptoethylamine moieties from AcCoA are buried in the active site of the protein. The positions of FAcCPan and FAcOPan in WtFlK differ significantly from that of AcCoA in the T42SFlK·AcCoA structure. Compared with the bound AcCoA, the bound FAcCPan is buried deeper in the active site, and the FAcOPan is located closer to the entrance of the tunnel (Fig. 3B). In a way that resembles the binding of AcCoA in T42SFlK, the carbonyl carbons of both FAcCPan and FAcOPan in WtFlK are in the wrong position and are even further away (3.88, 3.94, and 5.26 Å, respectively) from the Oγof Thr42. Furthermore, the binding coordinates of the same molecule also vary in different FlK dimers, suggesting that the presence of the nucleotide part of the CoA moiety is required for the correct overall engagement of the substrate at the substrate-binding site. In all of the FAc or Ac-bound FlK complexes, more than one molecule of FAc or Ac is bound in the large cavity of each active site. This may be a consequence of the high ligand concentrations (0.2 m) used in the crystallization solution and of the absence of the substrate. Interestingly but not surprisingly, at each active site, there is always one ligand situated at a position to where either the acetyl group of the AcCoA or the equivalent moiety of FAcCPan or FAcOPan is bound. The negatively charged carboxylic oxygen moieties of the ligands and the fluorine in the case of FAc are usually in contact with Thr42-N and/or Gly69-N in a seemingly random manner in terms of hydrogen bond donor-acceptor matching, suggesting that the backbone amide groups of Thr42 and Gly69 may be crucial binding interactions available at the active site to bind the substrate. Computational Docking of FAcCoA to FlK We have modeled a FAcCoA molecule into WtFlK (Fig. 5), based on the crystal structures of FlK in complex with various ligands, especially with AcCoA. The minimum energy was calculated using the SYBYL 8.1.1.09097 program. In a similar way to the AcCoA bound in T42SFlK, the 3′-phosphoryl-ADP region of the docked FAcCoA is at the enzyme surface in front of the entrance of the tunnel leading to the active site. The rest of the molecule extends into the tunnel, where the pantetheinyl moiety interacts through its N12, O9, N14, and C19, respectively, with the main chain oxygen and the side chain of His76, Ala79-N, and Phe128-Cϵ1. The hydrogen bond between the side chains of Arg120 and Glu50 is broken due to the flip of the carboxyl group of the Glu50. The fluorine is placed at a hydrogen bonding distance from Gly69-N and the guanidinium group of Arg120. Mutation of the Arg120 to Ala120 yielded a completely insoluble protein (data not shown), consistent with the involvement of Arg120 in maintaining the conformation of FlK. Thr42-Oγ is now located closer (3.79 Å) to the thioester carbonyl carbon and at a better, although not optimal, position for a possible nucleophilic attack. The Thr42-N that is close (2.81 Å) to the thioester carbonyl oxygen could act as an oxyanion hole for stabilization of the tetrahedral acyl-enzyme intermediate (Fig. 5). FIGURE 5.Proposed FAcCoA coordination at the active site of FlK. A, a stick model with FAcCoA shown in silver and residues from the two protomers represented in yellow and green colors, respectively. B, a scheme with FAcCoA (red) and active site residues (black). Hydrogen bonding interactions are denoted by dotted lines with distance in Å. Proposed FAcCoA coordination at the active site of FlK. A, a stick model with FAcCoA shown in silver and residues from the two protomers represented in yellow and green colors, respectively. B, a scheme with FAcCoA (red) and active site residues (black). Hydrogen bonding interactions are denoted by dotted lines with distance in Å. Increased Flexibility at the Active Site Resulting from Mutations of Thr42 The hydrophobic interactions between Thr42-Cγ2 and Ile72-Cγ2 in the adjacent protomer provide a “dry” environment around the catalytic Oγ1 of Thr42, protecting it from attacks by solvent molecules, a feature observed for other enzymes that have similar catalytic triad mechanisms (37). The Thr42-Cγ2 may also restrain the freedom of the substrate in the active site. Loss of this restraint imposed by the Cγ2 in the T42S mutant may allow random misbinding of the substrate, which in turn may result in the substrate inhibition observed in the enzyme assays. In support of this notion, the imidazole group of the His76 in the complex T42AFlK·FAc has a rotational disorder of ∼90° or exists in two alternative conformers not observed in WtFlK structures, and the Ser42 in one of the protomers of the T42SFlK·Ac structure shows a double conformation, demonstrating the increased flexibility of these residues in the absence of the Thr42-Cγ2 and/or -Oγ2 (Fig. 6). FIGURE 6.Structural differences observed in the catalytic site of FlK due to different mutations of Thr42. The active site residues Thr42, His76, and Glu50 of WtFIK are superimposed with their counterpart residues in T42AFIK and T42SFIK. A, Thr/Ala/Ser42 and His76 from protomer I and the Glu50 from protomer II; B, Thr/Ala/Ser42 and His76 from protomer II and the Glu50 from protomer I. Pink, WtFlK; green, T42AFlK; white, T42SFlK. The alternative conformations of His76 in T42A (pale green) and in T42S (yellow) are indicated. Structural differences observed in the catalytic site of FlK due to different mutations of Thr42. The active site residues Thr42, His76, and Glu50 of WtFIK are superimposed with their counterpart residues in T42AFIK and T42SFIK. A, Thr/Ala/Ser42 and His76 from protomer I and the Glu50 from protomer II; B, Thr/Ala/Ser42 and His76 from protomer II and the Glu50 from protomer I. Pink, WtFlK; green, T42AFlK; white, T42SFlK. The alternative conformations of His76 in T42A (pale green) and in T42S (yellow) are indicated. Conformational Change for Product Release The positions of the main chains are almost completely conserved in all FlK structures with or without mutations and/or bound ligands. Local conformational changes, especially in the hydrophobic loop 33FAEFP37, are observed. The side chain conformations of Phe33, Phe36, and Pro37 in the structures with bound Ac or FAc differ from those of unbound WtFlK and the structures in complex with AcCoA, FAcCPan, or FAcOPan (Fig. 7). In the unbound WtFlK, the planes of the phenyl rings of Phe33 and Phe36 are nearly perpendicular to each other resembling a closed two-door gate blocking the “exit” surrounded by the major helix (the “sausage”), the β-sheet (the “bun”), and the 33FAEFP37 loop. Binding of the substrate analogues, AcCoA, FAcCPan, or FAcOPan, does not lead to any significant change in the positions of the “doors.” When the active site is occupied by the product FAc or its analogue Ac, the “gate” in one of the protomers is wide open mainly due to a dramatic swing and flip of the side chain of Phe36, and the gate in the other protomer of the same dimer is also open although to a lesser extent. It is tempting to speculate that this opened gate is the exit for the product FAc. The negatively charged carboxyl group of Glu50, which has been “freed” from the hydrogen bond with the Arg120 side chain due to substrate binding, is located near the gate and may facilitate expulsion of the negatively charged FAc from the active site. FIGURE 7.Representation of the hydrophobic loop 33FAEFP37 present in the active site of FlK. Shown are the differences in the side chain for residues Phe33, Phe36, and Pro37 for WtFlK·FAc (yellow) and apo-WtFlK (green). Representation of the hydrophobic loop 33FAEFP37 present in the active site of FlK. Shown are the differences in the side chain for residues Phe33, Phe36, and Pro37 for WtFlK·FAc (yellow) and apo-WtFlK (green).