Results The chemical-genomic screen substantially expands known connections in E. coli We tested the sensitivities of 3975 mutants of E. coli K-12 to 57 stresses, split between new and previously screened conditions. The new stresses included neglected antibacterial compounds and other noxious chemicals with poorly characterized modes of action (Table 1). We pinned the arrayed mutant library onto agar plates containing each compound, imaged the plates after suitable colony growth, and quantified colony opacity using the image analysis software Iris [10]. We assigned fitness-scores to each mutant, using an in-house software package that built upon previous analyses [8,18] by implementing additional filtering and normalization steps to improve data quality (Methods). These fitness-scores represent the statistical significance of a change in colony size for a particular condition, with negative and positive fitness-scores representing sensitivity and resistance, respectively. New stresses in the chemical genomic screen. Stress Drug Family/ Stress Type Biological Target. D,L-serine hydroxamate hydroxamic acid seryl-tRNA synthetase. pseudomonic acid A monoxycarbolic acid isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase. blasticidin S aminonucleoside ribosome. kasugamycin inositol-based aminoglycoside ribosome. clindamycin lincosamide ribosome. 10°C growth cold shock multiple targets. cinoxacin quinolone gyrase. chlorhexidine bisguanide cell membrane. sodium fluoride anion enolase. 5-fluorouridine uracil analogue thymidylate synthase. gliotoxin epidithiodiketopiperazine unknown. holomycin dithiolopyrrolone unknown. thiolutin dithiolopyrrolone unknown. silver(II) nitrate divalent cation unknown. azelaic acid dicarboxylic acid unknown. isopropanol alcohol unknown. n-butanol alcohol unknown. t-butanol alcohol unknown. phenol alcohol unknown. guanidine chaotrope unknown. urea chaotrope unknown. DMSO polar organic solvent unknown. 5-methylanthranilic acid tryptophan precursor analogue unknown. 5-methyltryptophan tryptophan analogue unknown. 7-azatryptophan tryptophan analogue unknown. 4°C survival cold shock unknown. After reanalyzing the original images from the Nichols et al. [8] screen with our improved workflow, we integrated both datasets. Fitness-scores from stresses present in both screens were significantly correlated (Fig 1A). A responsive gene is defined as having at least one conditional-phenotype in the dataset. We identified more than 5,000 conditional-phenotypes for the 26 new stresses, as well as more than 500 additional responsive genes from the 57 stresses tested (14% of the library) (Fig 1B). The conditional-phenotypes that identified additional responsive genes were spread evenly throughout the current screen, ranging from 5 to 54 conditional-phenotypes per condition from within the set of new responsive genes. The integrated dataset also contained more than double the number of statistically significant correlations between genes than each screen considered separately (Fig 1C). 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006124.g001Fig 1The chemical genomic screen expands our view of gene function and intrinsic resistance in E. coli K-12.(A) A scatter plot of individual fitness-scores for conditions present in both screens (n = 17). Measurements between screens are reproducible, with a Pearson’s correlation of 0.61. (B) Conditional-phenotypes were assigned using a stress-specific cutoff for fitness-scores that allowed a false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. A responsive gene is defined as a gene with at least one phenotype in the dataset. (C) Significant correlations between genes were determined using a cutoff for Pearson’s correlation that allowed an FDR of 5%. The chemical genomic screen expands our view of gene function and intrinsic resistance in E. coli K-12. (A) A scatter plot of individual fitness-scores for conditions present in both screens (n = 17). Measurements between screens are reproducible, with a Pearson’s correlation of 0.61. (B) Conditional-phenotypes were assigned using a stress-specific cutoff for fitness-scores that allowed a false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. A responsive gene is defined as a gene with at least one phenotype in the dataset. (C) Significant correlations between genes were determined using a cutoff for Pearson’s correlation that allowed an FDR of 5%. This increase in the number of significant correlations came from two factors. First, the integrated dataset captured more conditional-phenotypes that in turn drove higher correlations for some genes. Second, smaller datasets require more stringent cutoffs for statistical significance that exclude a sizable fraction of the correlations (S1 Fig). Because of these factors, integration of chemical genomic screen with a larger dataset was critical for extracting as much information as possible from the new conditions. We use this integrated dataset (S1 Dataset) in all further analyses. A global picture of resistance to neglected antibiotics The pathways that sense and respond to different stresses are nearly as diverse as the types of stress that are encountered. Genes that are involved in drug permeability, drug efflux and degradation, stress responses, and the drug target all contribute to resistance. The chemical-genomic screen revealed a global picture of antibiotic resistance that reflected this diversity in mechanism (Fig 2A). 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006124.g002Fig 2A diverse set of pathways contribute to antibiotic resistance.Fitness-scores from the integrated dataset connected antibiotic resistance to multiple biological pathways. (A) Genes with different resistance mechanisms (target pathway, stress response, drug efflux, detoxification, and drug import) that protect against stresses from the current screen are organized according to mechansim. (B) A heatmap of fitness-scores for translation related genes. Sensitivities of deletions of various translation associated factors distinguish between drug families targeting translation. Sensitivities to aminoglycosides (gentamicin), macrolides (clarithromycin), tetracyclines (tetracycline), chloramphenicol, and tRNA synthetase inhibitors (pseudomonic acid A and serine hydroxamate) are shown. Fitness-scores from the integrated dataset that were determined in Nichols et al. [8] are marked with an asterisk (*). (C) A heatmap of fitness-scores for genes related to drug efflux and detoxification. Multiple drugs from the new screen were connected with the major efflux pump of E. coli, AcrAB-TolC. A diverse set of pathways contribute to antibiotic resistance. Fitness-scores from the integrated dataset connected antibiotic resistance to multiple biological pathways. (A) Genes with different resistance mechanisms (target pathway, stress response, drug efflux, detoxification, and drug import) that protect against stresses from the current screen are organized according to mechansim. (B) A heatmap of fitness-scores for translation related genes. Sensitivities of deletions of various translation associated factors distinguish between drug families targeting translation. Sensitivities to aminoglycosides (gentamicin), macrolides (clarithromycin), tetracyclines (tetracycline), chloramphenicol, and tRNA synthetase inhibitors (pseudomonic acid A and serine hydroxamate) are shown. Fitness-scores from the integrated dataset that were determined in Nichols et al. [8] are marked with an asterisk (*). (C) A heatmap of fitness-scores for genes related to drug efflux and detoxification. Multiple drugs from the new screen were connected with the major efflux pump of E. coli, AcrAB-TolC. Growth at 10°C resulted in multiple sensitivities from genes in pathways known to be affected by cold shock, with almost double the number of cold-sensitive mutations as the next lowest temperature (16°C). 10°C-sensitive genes were most enriched for COG categories [19] related to translation (J, p = 0.005) and DNA replication and repair (L, p = 0.01), with 20% of the sensitive genes falling into one of these two categories (Fig 2A, S1 Table). Ribosome assembly and function is particularly sensitive to temperatures of 10°C and below [20], which may explain part of the expansion of sensitivities at this temperature. Deletions in the trans-translation complex (ΔssrA and ΔsmpB) were sensitive to aminoglycosides and macrolides (Fig 2B), while the deletion of the alternative ribosome rescue factor (ΔarfA) was sensitized to members of the tetracycline family and chloramphenicol (Fig 2B). Deletions in the cytoplasmic protease HslUV (ΔhslU,V) and adaptors to the inner membrane protease FtsH (ΔhflC,K) were sensitized to blasticidin S (Fig 2B). These protease deletions have been demonstrated to be sensitive to aminoglycosides, both in E. coli [5,8] and in P. aeruginosa [21,22]. This set of pathways could be directly counteracting harmful effects of the translation inhibitors, with different pathways required to respond to unique mechanisms of action. As an example, deletion of the ribosome-bound ppGpp synthase (ΔrelA) resulted in sensitivity to both tRNA synthetase inhibitors used in the screen (Fig 2B). RelA has a known role in sensing and responding to uncharged tRNAs in the A-site of the ribosome [23]. Sensitivities from the screen also indicated that many of the antibiotics were subject to drug efflux and degradation (Fig 2A). Loss of AcrAB-TolC, the major efflux pump of E. coli [24], sensitized cells to gliotoxin, clindamycin, and pseudomonic acid A (Fig 2C). Other efflux pumps had more specific effects. The deletion strain ΔcrcB was sensitive to fluoride [25] while ΔmdtK was sensitive to serine hydroxamate [26]. The strain ΔyjjG was sensitive to 5-fluorouridine, consistent with the role of YjjG as a protective nucleotidase [27] (Fig 2C). For ΔcrcB, ΔmdtK, and ΔyjjG these chemical sensitivities were the strongest for each strain across the integrated dataset. Additionally, gene deletions within two peptide ABC-importers were resistant to the antibiotics kasugamycin and blasticidin S. The ABC-importers of bacteria have been implicated in uptake of a diverse set of antibiotics, including blasticidin S, in a process termed illicit transport [28–32]. This phenotype was particularly interesting because of the agricultural importance of kasugamycin and because the uptake mechanism for these drugs has not been described in E. coli K-12. We therefore tested whether Ksg and BcS were directly imported by these peptide ABC-importers. Two peptide ABC-importers determine the susceptibility of E. coli K-12 to kasugamycin and blasticidin S Hierarchical clustering of the fitness scores revealed a potential connection between the translation inhibitors kasugamycin (Ksg), an inositol-based aminoglycoside, blasticidin S (BcS), an aminonucleoside, (Fig 3A) and the major peptide ABC-importers of E. coli K-12; oligopeptide permease (Opp) and dipeptide permease (Dpp)[33–36] (Fig 3B). Dpp import is specific for dipeptides [37] while Opp can import peptides less than 5 amino acids in length [38]. 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006124.g003Fig 3Peptide ABC-importers determine susceptibility to kasugamycin and blasticidin S in E. coli K-12.(A) Structures of kasugamycin (Ksg) and blasticidin S (BcS). (B) Deletions of peptide importer genes are resistant to kasugamycin and blasticidin S. The heat-map of fitness-scores for dipeptide permease (ΔdppA, ΔdppB, ΔdppC, ΔdppD, and ΔdppF), oligopeptide permease (ΔoppA, ΔoppB, ΔoppC, ΔoppD, and ΔoppF), and their negative regulators (Δhfq, ΔgcvA, and ΔgcvB) for the entire set of new stresses is shown. Ksg and BcS are highlighted within the heatmap. (C) Deletions of each peptide permease operon show an increase in resistance to Ksg and BcS. 10-fold spot dilutions are shown for operon deletions Δopp, Δdpp and the double mutant Δopp Δdpp (D) Overexpression of opp results in a decrease in resistance to Ksg and BcS. 10-fold spot dilutions of cells with the high copy vector pDSW204 containing the opp operon (pOpp) grown without induction indicate decreased resistance to both Ksg and BcS relative to the empty vector control (vector). Peptide ABC-importers determine susceptibility to kasugamycin and blasticidin S in E. coli K-12. (A) Structures of kasugamycin (Ksg) and blasticidin S (BcS). (B) Deletions of peptide importer genes are resistant to kasugamycin and blasticidin S. The heat-map of fitness-scores for dipeptide permease (ΔdppA, ΔdppB, ΔdppC, ΔdppD, and ΔdppF), oligopeptide permease (ΔoppA, ΔoppB, ΔoppC, ΔoppD, and ΔoppF), and their negative regulators (Δhfq, ΔgcvA, and ΔgcvB) for the entire set of new stresses is shown. Ksg and BcS are highlighted within the heatmap. (C) Deletions of each peptide permease operon show an increase in resistance to Ksg and BcS. 10-fold spot dilutions are shown for operon deletions Δopp, Δdpp and the double mutant Δopp Δdpp (D) Overexpression of opp results in a decrease in resistance to Ksg and BcS. 10-fold spot dilutions of cells with the high copy vector pDSW204 containing the opp operon (pOpp) grown without induction indicate decreased resistance to both Ksg and BcS relative to the empty vector control (vector). Cells harboring deletions of each component of the Dpp complex were resistant to Ksg and three clustered (ΔdppC, ΔdppD, and ΔdppF) with Ksg resistance as their major phenotype. Similarly, most deletions of Opp subunits were resistant to BcS and three clustered (ΔoppB, ΔoppD, and ΔoppF). In addition, deletions of the negative regulators of Opp and Dpp expression (ΔΔgcvB, Δhfq, and ΔgcvA) led to hypersensitivity to both Ksg and BcS. We investigated these phenotypes further by constructing precise deletions of the ABC-importer operons (Δopp and Δdpp) and analyzing their phenotypes in MG1655, the standard wild-type background, growing in minimal media at a neutral pH. This growth condition enhances drug efficacy [16,17] and is associated with increased expression of opp and dpp [39,40]. Spot dilution tests revealed that the operon deletion strains grew equivalently to MG1655 in minimal media (Fig 3C, left), but were resistant to Ksg (Fig 3C, middle) and BcS (Fig 3C, right). Individual deletion strains Δopp and Δdpp were resistant to Ksg, but the highest level of Ksg resistance was conferred by the Δopp Δdpp double mutant. This suggested that both complexes participate in Ksg import. For BcS, Δopp alone was sufficient to confer high-level resistance. Consistent with elevated expression of the importers leading to sensitivity to Ksg and BcS, expression of the entire Opp operon from a plasmid (pOpp) was sufficient to confer sensitivity to both drugs (Fig 3D). Furthermore, the sensitivities of ΔgcvA and ΔgcvB to Ksg and BcS were completely suppressed in a Δopp Δdpp background (S2 Fig) confirming that these phenotypes were due to overexpression of Opp and Dpp. Opp and Dpp directly import kasugamycin and blasticidin S Both Ksg and BcS must transit through the inner membrane into the cytoplasm before they can bind to the ribosome and inhibit translation. The rate at which the drug enters the cytoplasm is likely the rate-limiting step for drug action. If so, an in vivo assay quantifying the rate translation is inhibited after drug treatment is a reasonable proxy for the rate of drug import. We used the amount of 35S-methionine (35S-Met) incorporated in a 1 min pulse as a measure of translation rate, and then quantified its rate of decline after addition of antibiotic. We found that the rate of translation inhibition after addition of Ksg (Fig 4A) and BcS (Fig 4B) was dependent on the presence of the peptide ABC-importers, with the ABC-importer deletion strains showing a 7 to 10-fold slower rate of decrease in translation than MG1655. In contrast, the rate of translation inhibition by kanamycin and spectinomycin was similar between MG1655 and the operon deletion strains (S3 Fig). This indicated that, like the antibiotic sensitivities, the effect of deleting these importers on antibiotic uptake was specific to Ksg and Bls. Finally, although less striking in magnitude, the rate of translation inhibition by kasugamycin was significantly faster when the opp operon was overexpressed (p<0.02 Paired Student’s t-test) (Fig 4C). These results provided evidence that the observed antibiotic sensitivities were due to altered drug uptake. 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006124.g004Fig 4Peptide ABC-importers determine the rate of translation inhibition by kasugamycin and blasticidin S.Altered kinetics of translation inhibition, as measured by 35S-methionine incorporation, serve as a proxy for changes in antibiotic uptake rates. (A) Deletion of opp and dpp slows the rate of translation inhibition following addition of 25mM kasugamycin (B) Deletion of opp slows the rate of translation inhibition by 1mM blasticidin S. Error bars represent standard deviation of technical replicates (n = 3) Each experiment was repeated with at least one biological replicate with similar results. (C) Overexpression of opp from a high copy vector increases the rate of translation inhibition by kasugamycin. Error bars represent measurements from two biological replicates (left). Significance was tested using a paired two-tailed student’s t-test (n = 2) at one minute after addition of kasugamycin (right). The kinetics of translation inhibition by kasugamycin was best fit with a double exponential decay function, whereas inhibition by blasticidin S was best fit using a single exponential decay function. Peptide ABC-importers determine the rate of translation inhibition by kasugamycin and blasticidin S. Altered kinetics of translation inhibition, as measured by 35S-methionine incorporation, serve as a proxy for changes in antibiotic uptake rates. (A) Deletion of opp and dpp slows the rate of translation inhibition following addition of 25mM kasugamycin (B) Deletion of opp slows the rate of translation inhibition by 1mM blasticidin S. Error bars represent standard deviation of technical replicates (n = 3) Each experiment was repeated with at least one biological replicate with similar results. (C) Overexpression of opp from a high copy vector increases the rate of translation inhibition by kasugamycin. Error bars represent measurements from two biological replicates (left). Significance was tested using a paired two-tailed student’s t-test (n = 2) at one minute after addition of kasugamycin (right). The kinetics of translation inhibition by kasugamycin was best fit with a double exponential decay function, whereas inhibition by blasticidin S was best fit using a single exponential decay function. To further test the hypothesis that Ksg was being directly imported by Opp and Dpp, we used an in vivo substrate competition assay (Fig 5A) to test whether the presence of high affinity substrates of Opp (Pro-Phe-Lys; PFK) and Dpp (Ala-Ala; AA) [41,42] competed with Ksg for uptake. Indeed, when Ksg was co-administered with these substrates, the rate of translation inhibition by Ksg was slowed dramatically, approximating that of the Δopp Δdpp double mutant strain. In contrast, the inhibition rate of a Δopp Δdpp strain was virtually insensitive to the addition of competitors. 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006124.g005Fig 5The peptide ABC-importers directly import kasugamycin.(A) The effect of peptide competitors for Dpp (Ala-Ala) and Opp (Pro-Phe-Lys) on the kinetics of inhibition of 35S-methionine incorporation. Addition of peptide competitors slowed the rate of translation inhibition by kasugamycin for wild-type E. coli but had a negligible effect for Δopp Δdpp. Error bars represent standard deviation of technical replicates (n = 3). This experiment was repeated with one biological replicate with similar results. (B) PFK binding to purified OppA induced an increase in intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence, as measured at 343 nm. Addition of 1 mM kasugamycin increased the effective concentration of PFK required to reach half-maximal fluorescence shift. Independent experiments with unique protein purifications had similar results. Equilibrium binding of PFK with and without kasugamycin was fit with a quadratic model that incorporates ligand-depletion. The peptide ABC-importers directly import kasugamycin. (A) The effect of peptide competitors for Dpp (Ala-Ala) and Opp (Pro-Phe-Lys) on the kinetics of inhibition of 35S-methionine incorporation. Addition of peptide competitors slowed the rate of translation inhibition by kasugamycin for wild-type E. coli but had a negligible effect for Δopp Δdpp. Error bars represent standard deviation of technical replicates (n = 3). This experiment was repeated with one biological replicate with similar results. (B) PFK binding to purified OppA induced an increase in intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence, as measured at 343 nm. Addition of 1 mM kasugamycin increased the effective concentration of PFK required to reach half-maximal fluorescence shift. Independent experiments with unique protein purifications had similar results. Equilibrium binding of PFK with and without kasugamycin was fit with a quadratic model that incorporates ligand-depletion. We next used an in vitro binding assay to test for a direct interaction between Ksg and OppA. We expressed and purified His-tagged OppA and tested for Ksg binding using intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence. Addition of 1 mM Ksg markedly increased the apparent KD of OppA for its high-affinity substrate PFK [43,44,42] (Fig 5B) but did not appreciably shift OppA fluorescence when added alone. A similar phenomenon has been shown for DppA, for which the relative change of fluorescence differs markedly even between natural high affinity peptide substrates [41]. While we cannot exclude the possibility that Ksg only indirectly alters OppA affinity for PFK in our in vitro assays, the increased apparent KD of OppA for PFK in the presence of Ksg is consistent with competitive binding between Ksg and PFK. Opp and Dpp work independently to import Ksg The solute binding protein (SBP) of each peptide ABC-importer freely diffuses in the periplasm, binding its substrate and delivering it to the pore of the complex (Fig 6A). In some cases, a single SBP has been shown to interact with the pores of multiple importers [45–47]. In particular, the SBP MppA has been shown to interact with both the Opp [46] and Dpp [47] pore in E. coli, depending on its substrate. Furthermore, DppA moonlights as the chemoreceptor for the peptide chemotaxis system of E. coli [37]. We refer to this phenomenon as crosstalk. To test whether crosstalk between importers or to other systems contributed to the import pathway for Ksg or BcS, we measured genetic interactions between components of the two complexes using the gold-standard assay for drug efficacy: MIC changes determined from a liquid 2-fold dilution series (see Methods). 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006124.g006Fig 6A common import pathway for kasugamycin and blasticidin S is likely to be conserved across multiple species.Genetic context is shown for importer genes likely to be involved in kasugamycin and blasticidin S uptake for multiple species. Sequence homologues of opp are shown in white. Sequence homologues of dpp are shown in black. The importer npp is shown in red. The proposed eukaryotic uptake gene from Magnaporthe oryzae is shown in blue. Genes that encode solute-binding proteins are named in each species. Periplasm (P), Inner Membrane (IM), and Cytoplasm (C) are labeled. (A) The opp and dpp operons in E. coli contribute to uptake of both kasugamycin and blasticidin S. The reference genome used was MG1655 (U00096.3). (B) Erwinia amylovora has high sequence homology to E. coli for both opp and dpp, and a duplication of the oppA gene. Uptake pathways in this species are unknown but likely to be similar to E. coli. The reference genome used was CFBP1430 (FN434113.1) (C) Pseudomonas aeruginosa has no clear sequence homologues of opp and multiple copies of dppA. Both the npp and dpp importers appear to uptake blasticidin S, but the responsible solute binding proteins have not been identified. The reference genome used was UCBPP-PA14 (CP000438.1) (D) Magnaporthe oryzae has no sequence homologues of oppA or dppA, but cross-resistance between kasugamycin and blasticidin S indicate that an analogous importer may be operating in this eukaryote. The gene responsible for cross-resistance was tentatively named kas-3 but this gene has not been mapped [48]. The reference genome used was 70–15 (AACU00000000.3). A common import pathway for kasugamycin and blasticidin S is likely to be conserved across multiple species. Genetic context is shown for importer genes likely to be involved in kasugamycin and blasticidin S uptake for multiple species. Sequence homologues of opp are shown in white. Sequence homologues of dpp are shown in black. The importer npp is shown in red. The proposed eukaryotic uptake gene from Magnaporthe oryzae is shown in blue. Genes that encode solute-binding proteins are named in each species. Periplasm (P), Inner Membrane (IM), and Cytoplasm (C) are labeled. (A) The opp and dpp operons in E. coli contribute to uptake of both kasugamycin and blasticidin S. The reference genome used was MG1655 (U00096.3). (B) Erwinia amylovora has high sequence homology to E. coli for both opp and dpp, and a duplication of the oppA gene. Uptake pathways in this species are unknown but likely to be similar to E. coli. The reference genome used was CFBP1430 (FN434113.1) (C) Pseudomonas aeruginosa has no clear sequence homologues of opp and multiple copies of dppA. Both the npp and dpp importers appear to uptake blasticidin S, but the responsible solute binding proteins have not been identified. The reference genome used was UCBPP-PA14 (CP000438.1) (D) Magnaporthe oryzae has no sequence homologues of oppA or dppA, but cross-resistance between kasugamycin and blasticidin S indicate that an analogous importer may be operating in this eukaryote. The gene responsible for cross-resistance was tentatively named kas-3 but this gene has not been mapped [48]. The reference genome used was 70–15 (AACU00000000.3). We first validated that the MIC changes of the peptide importer mutants were consistent with observations from the spot test assay. The single mutant Δopp was sufficient to confer an increase in the MIC for blasticidin S by more than an order of magnitude. For kasugamycin, Δopp conferred a 2-fold MIC increase, and the double mutant Δopp Δdpp exhibiting a a 4-fold MIC (Table 2). Δdpp did not confer greater than a two-fold increase in MIC in this assay. Overall, liquid MIC measurements were consistent with the original observation that BcS was imported through Opp while Ksg was imported through both Opp and Dpp. Genetic interactions of the peptide ABC-importer subunits. Strain MIC Kasugamycin (μg/mL) (Minimal Media) MIC Blasticidin S (μg/mL) (Minimal Media). E. coli K-12 MG1655 50 3–4. Δopp 100 60. ΔoppA 100 60. ΔoppB 100 60. Δopp Δdpp 200 60. ΔoppA ΔdppA 200 60. ΔoppB ΔdppB 200 60. We then tested for crosstalk during illicit transport. We asked whether deleting the SBP had the same quantitative effect on drug efficacy as deleting the pore. If crosstalk occurred, deleting a single SBP would provide less resistance than deleting the pore because all SBPs that deliver that substrate to the same pore must be removed to completely eliminate transport. For Opp, deleting the SBP (ΔoppA), the pore (ΔoppB), or the entire complex (Δopp) all resulted in the same extent of resistance to both Ksg and BcS (Table 2). This is consistent with OppA delivering Ksg and BcS to the Opp pore without crosstalk. Import of Ksg through Dpp also depended on DppA alone. Deleting both SBPs (ΔoppA ΔdppA) or both pores (ΔoppB ΔdppB) conferred the same degree of resistance to Ksg as deleting both operons (Δopp Δdpp), excluding a contribution from any additional unidentified SBPs in Ksg import (Table 2). We suggest a straightforward model in E. coli K-12 in which Opp directly imports both Ksg and BcS, Dpp directly imports Ksg, and there is no crosstalk for either complex (Fig 6A).