Results General genome characteristics The 119 Salinispora genome sequences were derived from 12 S. tropica, 45 S. pacifica, and 62 S. arenicola strains isolated from 11 global locations (Fig. 1). All strains were obtained from marine sediment samples collected at depths from 1–700 meters with the exception of four that were derived from marine sponges (Supplementary Table S1). No heterogeneity was observed in the 2–5 copies of the 16S rRNA gene observed in any of the strains. The draft genome sequences averaged 86.3 contigs (Supplementary Table S2) with the majority of sequence data accounted for by a few large contigs in each genome. The average genome size was 5.49 Mb, with the S. arenicola genomes being larger and containing more genes than the other two species (Table 1).Figure 1Strain origins. Numbers of strains sequenced at each site for each species with totals in parentheses. Modified with permission from Freel et al.24, Environ. Microbiol. 14:480–493.
Table 1Average genome statistics for the genus Salinispora and each species.TaxaGenome Size (Mbp)Gene CountScaffold CountGC Content (%)
Salinispora
5.5751488569.7
S. arenicola
5.7452348069.8
S. pacifica
5.4250799069.9
S. tropica
5.3149598969.2 Figure 1Strain origins. Numbers of strains sequenced at each site for each species with totals in parentheses. Modified with permission from Freel et al.24, Environ. Microbiol. 14:480–493. Strain origins. Numbers of strains sequenced at each site for each species with totals in parentheses. Modified with permission from Freel et al.24, Environ. Microbiol. 14:480–493. Average genome statistics for the genus Salinispora and each species. Taxa Genome Size (Mbp) Gene Count Scaffold Count GC Content (%). Salinispora 5.57 5148 85 69.7. S. arenicola 5.74 5234 80 69.8. S. pacifica 5.42 5079 90 69.9. S. tropica 5.31 4959 89 69.2. Orthologous groups The program FastOrtho was used to predict a total of 13,512 orthologous groups (OGs) and 4,980 single copy genes (singletons) among the 119 Salinispora genomes revealing a pan-genome that totaled 18,492 protein families. The core genome consists of 2603 OGs shared by all 119 strains, with 2362 of these occurring as a single-copy in each strain. The core genome represents 51% of the average gene content across the genus. Based on the annotation or putative function of the OGs, more than 50% of the pan-genome is comprised of poorly characterized genes (Supplementary Fig. S1). As observed in other genera29, the core genome is enriched in functionally annotated genes with the largest group (35%) attributed to metabolism. Similar analyses performed at the species level reveal that S. tropica has the largest core genome representing 78.68% of the average gene content. Conversely, S. pacifica displays the smallest core genome at 56.10% of the average gene content while S. arenicola was intermediate at 67.42%. As expected, the core genomes vary inversely as a function of the diversity of the strains sequenced within each species. Rarefaction curves were computed to estimate how effectively gene content had been sampled (Fig. 2). There is clear evidence for saturation when the genus or species-level core genomes are considered and thus the common genetic features that characterize the cultured representatives of these taxa have largely been identified. It is notable that the curves generated from the S. tropica and S. arenicola core genomes are largely identical, while the curve for S. pacifica resembles that describing the genus. For the pan-genomes however, it can be predicted that additional sequencing will reveal additional genetic diversity at all levels. Diversity estimators (Chao1 and ACE) predict more than 24,000 protein families at the genus-level relative to the 18,492 observed. Of the three species, S. pacifica shows the highest observed and predicted genetic diversity.Figure 2Rarefaction curves. Orthologous groups (protein families) plotted vs. the number of sequenced genomes. Core genomes (lower curves) and pan-genomes (upper curves) are shown for the genus and each species. Black: genus, red: S. tropica, blue: S. arenicola, yellow: S. pacifica. Blue shading indicates standard error. Diversity estimates using Chao1 and ACE are given. Figure 2Rarefaction curves. Orthologous groups (protein families) plotted vs. the number of sequenced genomes. Core genomes (lower curves) and pan-genomes (upper curves) are shown for the genus and each species. Black: genus, red: S. tropica, blue: S. arenicola, yellow: S. pacifica. Blue shading indicates standard error. Diversity estimates using Chao1 and ACE are given. Rarefaction curves. Orthologous groups (protein families) plotted vs. the number of sequenced genomes. Core genomes (lower curves) and pan-genomes (upper curves) are shown for the genus and each species. Black: genus, red: S. tropica, blue: S. arenicola, yellow: S. pacifica. Blue shading indicates standard error. Diversity estimates using Chao1 and ACE are given. Effects of recombination on Salinispora phylogeny The 2362 single copy genes identified in the core Salinispora genome (hereafter referred to as the single copy core or SCC) were used to generate a concatenated phylogeny that clearly resolved the genus into three well supported clades in accordance with prior species-level relationships (Fig. 3)19. This phylogeny supports the relatively high level of diversity reported for S. pacifica. We next used the program PhiPack to address the effects of recombination on phylogenetic reconstruction30. This led to the detection of 1,486 SCC genes (62.9%) with evidence of recombination. The remaining 876 genes had no evidence of recombination and are considered the “minimum” core genome. We generated a second concatenated phylogenomic tree using the minimum core genome (Fig. 3) and manually compared this to the individual gene trees for each of the 1,486 SCC genes with evidence of recombination. We identified 635 genes (42.7% of those under recombination and 26.9% of the SCC) that displayed incongruent species level phylogenies for at least one strain relative to the concatenated phylogenomic tree (Supplementary Fig. S2). To test for the aggregate effects of recombination, a third concatenated phylogeny was generated using the 1486 SCC genes with evidence of recombination (Fig. 3). Surprisingly, all three trees were both congruent and similarly well supported in terms of the three major clades associated with the named Salinispora species. Thus, recombination did not affect Salinispora species-level phylogenomic resolution. The large numbers of genes that displayed incongruent species-level phylogenies were insufficient to affect interspecies relationships when taken in the context of the larger gene pools. Notably, the tree generated from the minimum core genome reveals clear biogeographic patterns within S. arenicola that were obscured when genes subject to recombination were included (Fig. 3).Figure 3
Salinispora maximum likelihood phylogeny. (a) Collapsed phylogenomic tree based on a concatenation of 2362 shared, single-copy genes. Number of strains analyzed for each species is shown in parentheses. Non-collapsed trees are presented in Fig. 5. (b) Phylogeny based on genes with evidence of recombination. (c) Phylogeny based on genes with no evidence of recombination. Strain numbers are given in cases where the tree topologies differ. When possible, branches with the same topology in both trees were collapsed. Dashed lines depict positional changes of strains in the trees. Branches are color-coded by species. Symbols on the branches represent the support from 1,000 bootstrap replicates. Strain numbers are color-coded by location. Figure 3
Salinispora maximum likelihood phylogeny. (a) Collapsed phylogenomic tree based on a concatenation of 2362 shared, single-copy genes. Number of strains analyzed for each species is shown in parentheses. Non-collapsed trees are presented in Fig. 5. (b) Phylogeny based on genes with evidence of recombination. (c) Phylogeny based on genes with no evidence of recombination. Strain numbers are given in cases where the tree topologies differ. When possible, branches with the same topology in both trees were collapsed. Dashed lines depict positional changes of strains in the trees. Branches are color-coded by species. Symbols on the branches represent the support from 1,000 bootstrap replicates. Strain numbers are color-coded by location. Salinispora maximum likelihood phylogeny. (a) Collapsed phylogenomic tree based on a concatenation of 2362 shared, single-copy genes. Number of strains analyzed for each species is shown in parentheses. Non-collapsed trees are presented in Fig. 5. (b) Phylogeny based on genes with evidence of recombination. (c) Phylogeny based on genes with no evidence of recombination. Strain numbers are given in cases where the tree topologies differ. When possible, branches with the same topology in both trees were collapsed. Dashed lines depict positional changes of strains in the trees. Branches are color-coded by species. Symbols on the branches represent the support from 1,000 bootstrap replicates. Strain numbers are color-coded by location. These phylogenies were based on the concatenation of various gene sets into a single multiple alignment and the estimation of a single tree from this super-alignment. Given that alternative phylogenetic methods can infer different relationships, the data were re-analyzed using ASTRAL (Accurate Species TRee ALgorithm), a coalescent-based method to summarize individual gene trees into a single species tree31. ASTRAL identifies the species tree that agrees with the largest number of individual trees and can be more accurate than maximum likelihood analyses when using a concatenated gene set32. Given this, we performed a similar set of analyses using ASTRAL, which resulted in trees that were congruent at the species level with the concatenated trees (Supplementary Figs S3 and S4), thus providing further support for these phylogenetic patterns. ANI and ANI-AF metrics We next asked if the species assignments inferred from the three primary clades observed in the SCC phylogenomic tree, which have been used to distinguish among the three Salinispora species24, were in accordance with the proposal that ANI values between members of the same species should be ≥95%16. A distance matrix based on ANI values reveals a dendrogram with three primary bifurcations that are congruent with the phylogenomic tree (Fig. 4). However, many strains within the three primary clades fall below the 95% ANI metric, suggesting the existence of additional species-level diversity. More specifically, seven branches within the primary S. pacifica lineage could be considered distinct species based on this metric. The most populated branch includes the S. pacifica type strain (CNR-114)22 and 22 additional strains isolated from seven of the global collection sites. The second most populated branch includes 12 strains recovered largely from Fiji while the remaining five branches include one to three strains. The strains comprising these seven lineages are clearly resolved in the expanded phylogenomic tree (Fig. 5) and suggest that the primary clade sister to S. tropica is comprised of as many as seven distinct species of which S. pacifica is one. Similarly, the S. arenicola clade includes two branches that fall below the 95% ANI level. These consist of the single strain CNY-281 and a second branch that contains all of the remaining S. arenicola strains including the type strain. Conversely, the S. tropica clade is represented by a single branch within which all strains share >95% ANI. Thus, according to the ANI analyses, the 119 Salinispora strains represent as many as 10 different species.Figure 4Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) distance matrix. The vertical dashed line represents 95% ANI. Strains associated with the three primary clades are delineated by green (S. arenicola), red (S. tropica), and light blue (S. pacifica) branches. ANI clades that share >95% and are associated with type strains are shaded. Red circles and corresponding numbers represent all lineages that share <95% ANI values including seven (2–7, 9) that do not contain type strains. ANI-AF networks are shown adjacent to the corresponding regions in the dendogram. Each node represents a strain and is color-coded based on the 16S rRNA gene sequence types (single nucleotide polymorphisms) observed for each species.
Figure 5Effects of recombination on phylogenetic resolution using ANI species designations. (a) Phylogenomic tree based on a concatenation of 2362 shared, single-copy genes. Each sequence or clade that shares <95% ANI with neighboring strains is numbered 1–10 (corresponding to Fig. 4) and shaded with a different color. Species names are listed corresponding to the clades associated with the type strains (T). (b) Phylogeny based on genes with no evidence of recombination. (c) Phylogeny based on genes with evidence of recombination. Figure 4Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) distance matrix. The vertical dashed line represents 95% ANI. Strains associated with the three primary clades are delineated by green (S. arenicola), red (S. tropica), and light blue (S. pacifica) branches. ANI clades that share >95% and are associated with type strains are shaded. Red circles and corresponding numbers represent all lineages that share <95% ANI values including seven (2–7, 9) that do not contain type strains. ANI-AF networks are shown adjacent to the corresponding regions in the dendogram. Each node represents a strain and is color-coded based on the 16S rRNA gene sequence types (single nucleotide polymorphisms) observed for each species. Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) distance matrix. The vertical dashed line represents 95% ANI. Strains associated with the three primary clades are delineated by green (S. arenicola), red (S. tropica), and light blue (S. pacifica) branches. ANI clades that share >95% and are associated with type strains are shaded. Red circles and corresponding numbers represent all lineages that share <95% ANI values including seven (2–7, 9) that do not contain type strains. ANI-AF networks are shown adjacent to the corresponding regions in the dendogram. Each node represents a strain and is color-coded based on the 16S rRNA gene sequence types (single nucleotide polymorphisms) observed for each species. Figure 5Effects of recombination on phylogenetic resolution using ANI species designations. (a) Phylogenomic tree based on a concatenation of 2362 shared, single-copy genes. Each sequence or clade that shares <95% ANI with neighboring strains is numbered 1–10 (corresponding to Fig. 4) and shaded with a different color. Species names are listed corresponding to the clades associated with the type strains (T). (b) Phylogeny based on genes with no evidence of recombination. (c) Phylogeny based on genes with evidence of recombination. Effects of recombination on phylogenetic resolution using ANI species designations. (a) Phylogenomic tree based on a concatenation of 2362 shared, single-copy genes. Each sequence or clade that shares <95% ANI with neighboring strains is numbered 1–10 (corresponding to Fig. 4) and shaded with a different color. Species names are listed corresponding to the clades associated with the type strains (T). (b) Phylogeny based on genes with no evidence of recombination. (c) Phylogeny based on genes with evidence of recombination. We analyzed the data further using the ANI-AF method33, which considers only coding orthologous groups (CDS: From Coding DNA Sequences) and the alignment fraction (AF) between genomes as a measure of relatedness. The values suggested to delineate species are ANI >96.5 and AF >0.6. The ANI-AF results for S. tropica and S. arenicola remain the same, however within the S. pacifica clade, CNS-055 and CNY-646 are delineated as two additional species. Based on the ANI species designations, we re-investigated the effects of recombination on species-level phylogenomic resolution and once again found no effect (Fig. 5). The 10 candidate Salinispora species are all clearly resolved both from their minimum core genomes and the SCC genes with evidence of recombination. Thus, recombination does not affect the phylogenetic resolution of the major lineages associated with the three currently named Salinispora species or the ten candidate species into which these lineages could be delineated based on ANI. Salinispora 16S rRNA sequence types (single nucleotide polymorphisms) correspond surprisingly well to the ANI-AF clustering (Fig. 4). To further explore these relationships, we plotted 16S rRNA sequence divergence vs. ANI (Fig. 6). Interspecies comparisons based on the three primary clades in the Salinispora phylogeny revealed from five (St-Sp) to 14 (Sa-Sp) changes in the 16S rRNA gene. All S. arenicola and S. tropica intra-species comparisons are above 95% ANI and reveal at most three 16S polymorphisms while many of the S. pacifica intraspecies comparisons fall below this line and include up to six SNPs. A linear regression of the data and best-fit line reveals that a 95% ANI value corresponds to 3.1 changes in the 16S rRNA gene (Supplementary Fig. S5). Given that many of the intra-clade comparisons for the major clade that includes S. pacifica fall below 95% ANI, we performed a separate analysis of these seven lineages (Fig. 6). As expected, all comparisons within these seven clades fall above and all between clade comparisons fall below 95% ANI. In this case however, the inter-clade comparisons differ from 0–6 16S rRNA SNPs.Figure 6Relationships between 16S rRNA diversity and Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI). The black line indicates 95% ANI. (a) Inter- and intraclade comparisons among the three major lineages represented by S. tropica (St), S. arenicola (Sa), S. pacifica (Sp). (b) Inter- and intraclade comparisons among the S. pacifica clades (2–8) as identified in Figs 4 and 5. Figure 6Relationships between 16S rRNA diversity and Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI). The black line indicates 95% ANI. (a) Inter- and intraclade comparisons among the three major lineages represented by S. tropica (St), S. arenicola (Sa), S. pacifica (Sp). (b) Inter- and intraclade comparisons among the S. pacifica clades (2–8) as identified in Figs 4 and 5. Relationships between 16S rRNA diversity and Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI). The black line indicates 95% ANI. (a) Inter- and intraclade comparisons among the three major lineages represented by S. tropica (St), S. arenicola (Sa), S. pacifica (Sp). (b) Inter- and intraclade comparisons among the S. pacifica clades (2–8) as identified in Figs 4 and 5. Genetic basis for species delineations We previously reported species-specific patterns of secondary metabolite production in S. arenicola and S. tropica
26, however similar patterns were not observed for S. pacifica
25. To further explore this concept in S. pacifica, we identified biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) associated with secondary metabolism using antiSMASH34 and manual annotations. We then prepared a similarity matrix using the presence/absence of BGCs in each strain as input (Supplementary Fig. S6). Except for the position of CNY-666, the BGC dendrogram and the phylogenomic tree are largely identical. To further test for evidence of genetic or functional traits that differentiate the candidate Salinispora species, we performed similar analyses based on the presence or absence of orthologous groups associated with 23 COG categories (Supplementary Table S3) and found that categories C (energy production and conversion, Supplementary Fig. S7), E (amino acid transport and metabolism), G (carbohydrate transport and metabolism), H (coenzyme transport and metabolism), I (lipid transport and metabolism), and R (general function prediction) consistently delineated the candidate species within the primary S. pacifica lineage in accordance with the phylogenomic tree (Fig. 5). Thus, in addition to secondary metabolism, there appear to be major genetic differences among the candidate S. pacifica species. While differences in gene content provide one mechanism to distinguish among species, it can also be expected that the same species will share a certain level of genetic homogeneity. To explore these concepts, we plotted OG distributions across various taxonomic levels (Fig. 7). All histograms clearly show that most genes are either rare or occur in all strains. When the genus is assessed, the core genome represents only 14% of the pan-genome and the relatively large spike in the left portion of the graph provides little evidence for genetic cohesion, as might be expected from a genus comprised of multiple species29. Conversely, when S. arenicola and S. tropica are plotted, the core genomes represent 29% and 58% of the respective pan-genomes, and the numbers of OGs observed in all strains exceed those observed in only one strain. In the primary S. pacifica lineage however, the pattern is similar to that detected for the genus, with the core genome representing only 22% of the pan-genome. As was observed in the rarefaction curves, these results are more similar to those for the genus than for either S. tropica or S. arenicola. We performed similar analyses using the two most populated candidate species within the primary S. pacifica lineage and observed OG distributions that resemble S. tropica and S. arenicola, with core genomes between 40% and 44% of the pan-genomes. These patterns may provide added insight into the levels of genetic cohesion expected for a bacterial species.Figure 7Numbers of orthologous groups found across all genomes (upper left), S. arenicola genomes (upper center), S. tropica genomes (upper right), S. pacifica genomes (bottom left), S. pacifica candidate species“Sp1” (bottom center), S. pacifica candidate species “Sp2” (bottom right). The histograms were generated from the pan-genomes excluding singletons and recent paralogs. Figure 7Numbers of orthologous groups found across all genomes (upper left), S. arenicola genomes (upper center), S. tropica genomes (upper right), S. pacifica genomes (bottom left), S. pacifica candidate species“Sp1” (bottom center), S. pacifica candidate species “Sp2” (bottom right). The histograms were generated from the pan-genomes excluding singletons and recent paralogs. Numbers of orthologous groups found across all genomes (upper left), S. arenicola genomes (upper center), S. tropica genomes (upper right), S. pacifica genomes (bottom left), S. pacifica candidate species“Sp1” (bottom center), S. pacifica candidate species “Sp2” (bottom right). The histograms were generated from the pan-genomes excluding singletons and recent paralogs.