Results Microfluidic Selection of Antibiotic Activity. The saliva samples collected from an oral cavity of the Siberian brown bear were screened for bacteria inhibiting the growth of pathogenic Staphylococcus aureus cells using a microfluidic platform (Fig. 1). It is based on cocultivation of oral microbiota members with the target S. aureus strain producing GFP reporter in droplets of microfluidic double water-in-oil-in-water emulsion (MDE). Fig. 1.(A) Principal scheme of bacteria isolation demonstrating antimicrobial activity against the target S. aureus from oral microbiota of the Siberian bear using the uHT microfluidic droplet platform. The isolated microbiota was coencapsulated with the target pathogen producing a GFP reporter. After in droplet cocultivation, the bacteria were stained and sorted for isolating the droplets with a high initial target load, low GFP level, and high metabolic activity. (B) MDE droplets with coencapsulated target S. aureus cells and microbiota species after in droplet cocultivation. (Scale bar: 50 μm.) (A) Principal scheme of bacteria isolation demonstrating antimicrobial activity against the target S. aureus from oral microbiota of the Siberian bear using the uHT microfluidic droplet platform. The isolated microbiota was coencapsulated with the target pathogen producing a GFP reporter. After in droplet cocultivation, the bacteria were stained and sorted for isolating the droplets with a high initial target load, low GFP level, and high metabolic activity. (B) MDE droplets with coencapsulated target S. aureus cells and microbiota species after in droplet cocultivation. (Scale bar: 50 μm.) The combination of three independent fluorescent signals was used to isolate MDE droplets by FACS. The isolated droplets had to conform to the following criteria simultaneously; they exhibited a high initial S. aureus load and a low S. aureus count after in droplet cocultivation accompanied by the presence of live, metabolically active cells. The overall throughput of this platform was estimated to embrace 30,000 droplets per second, which enabled deep probing of microbial community based on anti-S. aureus activity. Several bacterial clones with anti-S. aureus activity were selected and identified as Enterococcus casseliflavus, Weissella confusa, and B. pumilus. These strains were not selected during the preliminary standard testing of bear’s microbiota. This indicates a substantial enrichment of bacteria displaying antagonistic properties against S. aureus after uHT screening in MDE droplets. In what follows, we focus on the isolated B. pumilus, as it was the most efficient inhibitor of S. aureus growth in a plate overlay assay. Antibacterial Activity of B. pumilus Is Mediated by the Production of Amicoumacin A. The isolated B. pumilus 124 strain displaying antibacterial activity against S. aureus was analyzed for the biologically active metabolites and found to produce Ami, an antibiotic previously discovered for Bacillus (14–16) and Xenorhabdus bovienii (17). Whole-genome sequencing with a subsequent mining of the B. pumilus 124 genome identified a hybrid PKS–NRPS cluster of Ami biosynthetic genes. The identified cluster had a similar architecture, but limited similarity to the previously described Ami cluster (18) from Bacillus subtilis (Fig. 2A). Fig. 2.A multiomics approach applied to discover the regulation of Ami production. (A) NGS and genome mining were used to identify Ami biosynthetic gene clusters. Comparison of Ami biosynthesis gene clusters from producing the B. pumilus 124 strain (NCBI QENN00000000), nonproducing B. pumilus 123 strain (NCBI QENO00000000), and the previously reported B. subtilis 1779 strain (18). Scale bar indicates protein identities. (B) Proteomics was used to determine the borders of the Ami cluster. Differential profile of protein level in activated (F) and inactivated (N) conditions on a proteome level and Ami biosynthetic cluster. Scale bar indicates a fold difference between F and N. (C) Metabolomics was used to confirm the biological functions of AmiN and AmiO. Ami activation via dephosphorylation was observed after amiN knockout and amiO heterologous expression in B. subtilis. (D) General scheme illustrating Ami interconversion by AmiN and AmiO and its spontaneous inactivation by deamidation. AmiA (Ami) denotes amicoumacin A; AmiB and AmiC, amicoumacin B and C; and AmiA-P and AmiB-P, phosphorylated AmiA and AmiB, respectively. A multiomics approach applied to discover the regulation of Ami production. (A) NGS and genome mining were used to identify Ami biosynthetic gene clusters. Comparison of Ami biosynthesis gene clusters from producing the B. pumilus 124 strain (NCBI QENN00000000), nonproducing B. pumilus 123 strain (NCBI QENO00000000), and the previously reported B. subtilis 1779 strain (18). Scale bar indicates protein identities. (B) Proteomics was used to determine the borders of the Ami cluster. Differential profile of protein level in activated (F) and inactivated (N) conditions on a proteome level and Ami biosynthetic cluster. Scale bar indicates a fold difference between F and N. (C) Metabolomics was used to confirm the biological functions of AmiN and AmiO. Ami activation via dephosphorylation was observed after amiN knockout and amiO heterologous expression in B. subtilis. (D) General scheme illustrating Ami interconversion by AmiN and AmiO and its spontaneous inactivation by deamidation. AmiA (Ami) denotes amicoumacin A; AmiB and AmiC, amicoumacin B and C; and AmiA-P and AmiB-P, phosphorylated AmiA and AmiB, respectively. Using genome mining, we found the biosynthetic clusters related to Ami cluster (SI Appendix, Fig. S1), some of which were previously described as responsible for producing the following antibiotics: zwittermicin (19), paenilamicin (20), xenocoumacin (21), and colibactin (22, 23) (Fig. 3). Fig. 3.Representative Ami homologous gene clusters that were identified through genome mining. The core biosynthetic genes are green, the activating peptidases, blue. A neighbor joining tree of different clusters was built based on a reciprocal blast score. The known products of biosynthetic clusters are represented as prodrugs that are further proteolytically processed up to their active form by N-acyl-d-Asn (blue; R, fatty acid residue) cleavage. Preantibiotic forms of 1, amicoumacin A; 2, zwittermicin A; 3, paenilamicin B1; 4, xenocoumacin 1; and 5, proposed colibactin. Representative Ami homologous gene clusters that were identified through genome mining. The core biosynthetic genes are green, the activating peptidases, blue. A neighbor joining tree of different clusters was built based on a reciprocal blast score. The known products of biosynthetic clusters are represented as prodrugs that are further proteolytically processed up to their active form by N-acyl-d-Asn (blue; R, fatty acid residue) cleavage. Preantibiotic forms of 1, amicoumacin A; 2, zwittermicin A; 3, paenilamicin B1; 4, xenocoumacin 1; and 5, proposed colibactin. The notable peculiarity of these clusters is the presence of a gene coding the specific peptidase, activating cognate preantibiotics during the export process. There is, however, an additional gene encoding N-acetyltransferase AmiS inactivating Ami in the case of Ami-like gene cluster from X. bovienii (17). The fact that amiS homolog is absent in both B. pumilus 124 and B. subtilis 1779 strains gave rise to an idea that Bacilli should have an alternative mechanism of self-resistance. Hashimoto et al. (24) have reported the presence of a phosphorylated Ami, produced by B. pumilus, and demonstrated that the phosphorylated Ami is inactive. We found two genes, amiN and amiO, encoding a putative kinase and an alkaline phosphatase, respectively, adjacent to the core biosynthetic genes of the Ami cluster and hypothesized that their products may contribute to both self-resistance and Ami biosynthesis. The tandem-mass spectral analysis was used to find molecular weight of Ami derivates, namely the phosphorylated AmiA-P and AmiB-P (Fig. 2D). It was shown that these compounds have exactly the same mass value as described by Hashimoto et al. (24), where the site of Ami phosphorylation by NMR was determined. The Regulation of Ami Production in B. pumilus. The essential role of genes amiA–amiM in Ami biosynthesis was previously demonstrated through a homologous B. subtilis 1779 cluster (18); yet the mechanism was not elucidated. Here we observe Ami production to be inducible and regulated at several additional levels in B. pumilus. Ami production was induced while cultivated in a thin layer without shaking. Cultivation with limited aeration and shaking resulted in more than a 20-fold decrease in Ami production, which was insufficient to inhibit Staphylococcus (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). Metabolomic analysis of B. pumilus 124 cultivated in “activated” (F) and “inactivated” (N) conditions revealed that the inactive phosphorylated Ami derivatives were present exclusively inside the bacterial cells, and absent in the culture medium. A dramatic difference in Ami phosphorylation balance between F and N states was also manifested, suggesting that Ami was efficiently inactivated via phosphorylation in N conditions. Ami production in F conditions entailed the formation of a slimy film that was essential for inhibiting S. aureus during cocultivation (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). This biofilm enabled B. pumilus to entrap S. aureus and restrict its growth and was further efficiently attacked by DNase treatment. While biofilm production was observed both for Ami-producing B. pumilus 124 and B. pumilus 123 without the Ami cluster, only B. pumilus 124 inhibited S. aureus growth (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). We analyzed the proteome of B. pumilus 124 in cells cultivated under the activated and inactivated conditions to reveal the mechanism by which Ami synthesis is activated and regulated (Fig. 2B). We observed the increased levels of enzymes involved in de novo inosine monophosphate (IMP) biosynthesis, peptidoglycan synthesis and remodeling, as well as flagellum organization. We speculate that the enzymes involved in peptidoglycan synthesis and remodeling influence the process of biofilm formation, while the improved flagella biosynthesis helps overcome an increased viscosity and contribute to S. aureus entrapment. The protein levels of AmiA–AmiM as well as AmiN, AmiO, and putative MFS family major facilitator transporter AmiP were significantly higher upon activation. Moreover, a drastic difference in the protein level was documented in case of a putative Ami transporter AmiP, activating peptidase AmiB and phosphatase AmiO (Fig. 2B). Recombinant AmiN and AmiO were produced in Escherichia coli (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). We observed a rapid phosphorylation of Ami by AmiN in vitro using purified AmiN, while purified AmiO dephosphorylated phosphorylated Ami (Ami-P). As expected, the major difference between the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of Ami and Ami-P (0.25 and >100 µg/mL) was observed using S. aureus reporter, indicating that Ami was inactivated via phosphorylation and further reactivated by dephosphorylation. The biological function of AmiN was elucidated using E. coli BL21(DE3) and B. subtilis 168 surrogate hosts (SI Appendix, Table S1). Transformation of E. coli with a plasmid encoding AmiN conferred the resistance to Ami. B. subtilis 168 has an amiN homolog (yerI) that also phosphorylates Ami, mediating natural B. subtilis resistance to the drug. A knockout of yerI made B. subtilis susceptible to Ami (MIC 0.8 µg/mL) but its resistance was restored after transformation with a plasmid expressing amiN. Production of AmiO by B. subtilis 168 ΔyerI resulted in Ami-P dephosphorylation (Fig. 2C). We did not observe any background phosphatase activity in B. subtilis even though it encodes two homologous alkaline phosphatases 3 and 4, pointing at AmiO specificity toward Ami-P. Technique for uHT Profiling of Ami Activity in Different Microbiota Sources. Differential levels of antibiotic resistance, growth rate, and intricate interactions between members hamper analysis of microbial communities. To devise a simple technique for uHT profiling of external influence on microbiome, we developed a method grounded in the MDE platform (Fig. 4A). Fig. 4.(A) The principal scheme of the activity/sensitivity spectrum assessment using highly heterogeneous bacteria population (microbiota) and MDE screening platform. This figure is instructional and virtually identical to figure 3 of ref. 13. (B) Heat map indicating the portion of bacteria and influence of Ami on different microbiota samples: oral microbiota of Siberian bear (bear), human fecal microbiota from a patient with colitis (patient), and a healthy human donor (donor). The data were obtained before (before) and after applying MDE screening platform, i.e., single-cell cultivation in droplets with various Ami concentrations (0, 10, and 100 µg/mL), selection of metabolically active population of cells encapsulated in droplets with subsequent metagenomic sequencing and bioinformatic analysis. (A) The principal scheme of the activity/sensitivity spectrum assessment using highly heterogeneous bacteria population (microbiota) and MDE screening platform. This figure is instructional and virtually identical to figure 3 of ref. 13. (B) Heat map indicating the portion of bacteria and influence of Ami on different microbiota samples: oral microbiota of Siberian bear (bear), human fecal microbiota from a patient with colitis (patient), and a healthy human donor (donor). The data were obtained before (before) and after applying MDE screening platform, i.e., single-cell cultivation in droplets with various Ami concentrations (0, 10, and 100 µg/mL), selection of metabolically active population of cells encapsulated in droplets with subsequent metagenomic sequencing and bioinformatic analysis. The main idea of this approach is based on cultivating the individual cells from microbiota samples together with antibiotic inside MDE droplets. Subsequently, the droplets are stained for metabolic activity, selected using FACS, and analyzed by NGS and bioinformatic analysis. The single-cell in droplet cultivation abolishes any effect of proximal bacterial clones and allows the use of uHT of broad microbial biodiversity. To validate the procedure, we determined the effects of Ami administration on the oral microbiota from the Siberian bear and human fecal microbiota from a patient with colitis and a healthy donor (Fig. 4B). The composition of bear oral microbiota dramatically differs from human oral microbiota and has much more in common with human fecal microbiota (SI Appendix, Fig. S5). We observed that 83% of bacteria were culturable in droplets (SI Appendix, Fig. S6). Cultivation of fast-growing species in droplets restricted their propagation to MDE compartments, thus allowing assessment of minor microbiota species that represent less than 0.1% of the initial population. uHT screening of Ami activity brought about an increase in frequency of some bacteria and a decrease in frequency of others (Fig. 5A), which enabled us to estimate susceptibility/resistance to Ami for each particular bacterium in every microbiota sample (Fig. 5B). Our estimations were confirmed using clinical isolates. We found that the MIC ranges obtained using microbiota composition shifts after a single-cell cultivation in MDE compartments were in agreement with MIC of clinical isolates measured using the standard assay (Fig. 5B). Furthermore, we observed a strong correlation between the values of composition shift (scores) and MIC measured in vitro. This correlation analysis allowed us to predict the ranges of MIC for each investigated bacterium (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). Fig. 5.(A) Heat map indicating a shift of microbiota composition after the single-cell cultivation in MDE compartments in the presence of 10 and 100 µg/mL Ami, relative to the respective cultivation without an antibiotic. Indication is represented as follows: bear oral microbiota (B), human fecal microbiota from a patient with colitis (P), a healthy human donor (D). (B) Comparison between MIC predicted using single-cell cultivation in MDE in the presence of Ami (Left, scale with bars) and MIC of clinical isolates measured in vitro (Right, scatterplot). Scale bars (Left) indicate the values of scores obtained from the shift of microbiota composition after single-cell cultivation in MDE compartments in the presence of Ami. The scores enabled us to range bacteria according to their resistance to Ami and subdivide them into groups according to the values of their predicted MIC (<10, 10–100, >100 µg/mL). Each point of the scatterplot (Right) represents MIC measured in vitro for a particular bacterial strain, the horizontal lane represents the range, and the vertical lane indicates the mean. (A) Heat map indicating a shift of microbiota composition after the single-cell cultivation in MDE compartments in the presence of 10 and 100 µg/mL Ami, relative to the respective cultivation without an antibiotic. Indication is represented as follows: bear oral microbiota (B), human fecal microbiota from a patient with colitis (P), a healthy human donor (D). (B) Comparison between MIC predicted using single-cell cultivation in MDE in the presence of Ami (Left, scale with bars) and MIC of clinical isolates measured in vitro (Right, scatterplot). Scale bars (Left) indicate the values of scores obtained from the shift of microbiota composition after single-cell cultivation in MDE compartments in the presence of Ami. The scores enabled us to range bacteria according to their resistance to Ami and subdivide them into groups according to the values of their predicted MIC (<10, 10–100, >100 µg/mL). Each point of the scatterplot (Right) represents MIC measured in vitro for a particular bacterial strain, the horizontal lane represents the range, and the vertical lane indicates the mean. Gram-negative Proteus mirabilis, Acinetobacter baumannii, Morganella morganii, and Enterobacter cloacae were resistant, while Gram-positive Macrococcus caseolyticus, Staphylococcus (except Staphylococcus vitulinus), Aerococcus viridans, and W. confusa were sensitive to Ami. Bacilli (B. subtilis, Bacillus licheniformis, and B. pumilus) were also resistant, likely due to the presence of AmiN or its homologs. The major components which were overrepresented in the patient microbiota over the donor one (SI Appendix, Fig. S8), i.e., Enterococcus faecium and Bacteroides vulgatus, were also susceptible to Ami. Hence, Ami-producing B. pumilus 124 may hold promise as a probiotic for controlled remodeling of human gut microbiota.