2. Results 2.1. Phenotypic Characterization of Cucumber Cultivars after C. cassiicola Infection All cucumber cultivars were inoculated on the second leaves with C. cassiicola and infected after 5 days. The disease index statistics of each strain are shown in Table 1, which shows that there were obvious differences in disease resistance among different cucumber strains. Jinyou 38 was highly resistant to C. cassiicola. B21-a-2-1-2 and F10 were moderately resistant to C. cassiicola. B21-a-2-2-2, 995, Jinyan 4 and Xintaimici were susceptible to C. cassiicola. Based on the disease index survey, we selected the high-resistance variety Jinyou 38 and the susceptible variety Xintaimici to carry out the next experiments [42]. 2.2. Isolation and Phylogenetic Analysis of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 A search of the cucumber genomics database (http://cucurbitgenomics.org/) and gene prediction analysis of the cucumber genome led to the identification of two hypothetical full-length CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 transcripts in the Xintaimici and Jinyou 38 cultivars. The 1749 bp full-length CsMLO1 cDNA encoding a 66.92 kDa protein with 582 amino acid residues and the 1725 bp full-length CsMLO2 cDNA encoding a 64.25 kDa protein with 574 amino acid residues were identified from cucumber leaves (Figures S1 and S2). The cDNA sequences of CsMLO1 were cloned from the experimental materials of Jinyou 38 and Xintaimici, and the results showed that there was no difference in cDNA sequences of CsMLO1 between the Jinyou 38 variety and Xintaimici variety. Similarly, similar cloning and alignment methods found that cDNA sequences of CsMLO2 also had no differences between the Jinyou 38 variety and Xintaimici variety. A sequence analysis predicted that CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 were homologous to MLO proteins. Both homoeologous proteins shared high similarity with proteins for powdery mildew fungus susceptibility in pepper, Arabidopsis, turnip and barley. These amino acid sequences were highly conserved and contained seven transmembrane structures (TM1–TM7) and a C-terminal calmodulin-binding domain (CaMBD) in the C-terminal region (Figure S3). A phylogenetic tree containing 21 MLO proteins from dicots and monocots demonstrated the phylogenetic relationships. CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 proteins were clustered with the five dicot subfamilies containing AtMLO2, AtMLO6, AtMLO12, BrMLO1, LeMLO1, and CaMLO1 and the monocot OsMLO1 (Figure S4A). Each of these proteins was previously shown to be required for powdery mildew susceptibility. Putative CaMBDs in the C-terminus of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 were located at Ala 453–Arg 471 and Ala 443–Arg 461 (Figure S4B), which was highly conserved throughout the Arabidopsis MLO family. The Ca2+-dependent CaM-binding motif contained Trp 419, which is known to play a significant role in CaM binding to CaM target proteins [43]. The potential functional conservation of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 suggested that they were co-orthologs of the monocot barley HvMLO and the dicot Arabidopsis AtMLO2, AtMLO6, and AtMLO12 proteins. 2.3. Subcellular Localization and Expression Patterns of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 A sequence analysis indicated that the proteins encoded by CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 were transmembrane proteins with seven transmembrane structures (Figure S5). To confirm this prediction, we determined the subcellular localizations of the CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 proteins, and confocal imaging showed that CsMLO1-GFP and CsMLO2-GFP fluorescence were localized in the plasma membrane, whereas the GFP protein was found in multiple subcellular compartments, including the cell membrane, cytoplasm, and nucleus (Figure 1). To investigate the spatial expression patterns of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2, we performed a qRT-PCR analysis of the tissue-specific expression patterns in different cucumber organs of susceptible and resistant cultivars (Figure S6). CsMLO1 exhibited the highest expression in the stem followed by the leaf, but it was weakly expressed in the cotyledon and root from the susceptible cultivar (Figure S6A). However, in the resistant cultivars, CsMLO1 was relatively highly expressed in the cotyledons and roots, followed by the leaves and stems (Figure S6B). In addition, CsMLO2 was significantly expressed in the leaf and cotyledon but was barely expressed in the stem and root from different cucumber organs of susceptible and resistant cultivars (Figure S6C,D). Therefore, the combined subcellular localization and spatial expression patterns indicated that CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 are both typical MLO proteins and exhibit tissue-specific expression. 2.4. Response to Abiotic Stresses We investigated the expression patterns of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 genes in response to plant hormones and abiotic stimuli. The transcript levels of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 were observed under abiotic stimuli in the leaves of susceptible and resistant cultivars. To determine whether CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 were regulated by extracellular signals, we investigated the possible involvement of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 in signaling pathways related to phytohormones and CaCl2. The expression characteristics of the CsMLO1 gene and the CsMLO2 gene were distinct in the resistant cultivar (Figure S7). Compared with those of the control plants, CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 showed different expression patterns after exogenous treatment with H2O2, ABA, SA, MeJA and CaCl2. The CsMLO1 transcript level was suppressed in resistant cultivars after treatment with exogenous ABA, CaCl2 and H2O2. CsMLO2 transcription was downregulated at 24 h and 48 h after treatment with exogenous H2O2, and CsMLO2 expression was distinctly induced and peaked at 12 h, followed by a downward trend in expression at 24 h and 48 h after treatment with exogenous CaCl2. But, CsMLO2 expression was upregulated after treatment with exogenous SA. Thus, these results indicated that CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 might be involved in ROS, ABA, SA and calcium signaling pathway. 2.5. Expression Patterns of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 in the Resistant/Susceptible Cucumber Cultivars after C. cassiicola Infection CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 of cucumber were found to be involved in the response to C. cassiicola in previous work by iTRAQ and RNA-seq, and resistant/susceptible cucumber cultivars were also investigated for disease index by disease index analysis (Table S1). Jinyou 38 showed resistance with a low infection index (14.85), and Xintaimici showed high susceptibility with a 72.33 index at 7 dpi (days post-inoculation). To further confirm these results, we obtained images of the cucumber cultivars in response to C. cassiicola under different time courses. Susceptible cucumber plants showed symptoms at 48 h after C. cassiicola infection, and evident symptoms were found on the leaves at 72 h and 144 h, whereas only faint symptoms were detected on the leaves of the resistant cucumber plants at 72 h and 144 h (Figure 2A). To determine whether CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 were affected by C. cassiicola, we performed RT-qPCR assays to examine the expression patterns of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 at different times using resistant and susceptible cultivars (Figure 2B). A comparison of the two cultivars showed that CsMLO1 expression was induced at 24 h and peaked at 48 h in the susceptible cultivar. In the resistant cultivar, CsMLO1 expression was largely induced at 48 and 72 h. However, CsMLO2 expression was decreased in the initial phase in the two cultivars and appeared to be significantly higher in the susceptible cultivar than in the resistant cultivar at 48 h. This finding suggested that the expression of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 appeared to be faster in the susceptible cultivar than in the resistant cultivar when inoculated with C. cassiicola. 2.6. CsMLO1 or CsMLO2 Silencing Improves Resistance to C. cassiicola in Cucumber Cotyledon To determine whether a loss-of-function of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 affected cucumber resistance to C. cassiicola, we used tobacco rattle virus (TRV)-based virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) to silence CsMLO1/CsMLO2 transcripts in the susceptible cultivar Xintaimici. A 3′-terminal fragment specific to CsMLO1/CsMLO2 was inserted in the vector pTRV2, the pTRV2-CsMLO1/CsMLO2 recombinant plasmids (Figure 3A). Subsequently, TRV:CsMLO1 or TRV:CsMLO2 virus was injected in cucumber cotyledons. The chlorotic mosaic symptoms of TRV:00, TRV:CsMLO1, TRV:CsMLO2 emerged in the cotyledons of transgenic cucumber plants, while no symptoms appeared in the non-injected cucumber cotyledons, suggesting that TRV successfully invaded the cucumber plants (Figure 3B). Simultaneously, efficient silencing of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 was confirmed by RT-qPCR (Figure 3C). In addition, to test whether the CsMLO2 gene was also silenced in CsMLO1-silenced cucumber plants, we detected CsMLO2 expression and observed no silencing by RT-qPCR. Similarly, we detected CsMLO1 expression in CsMLO2-silenced cucumber cotyledon. These results indicated that expression was almost abolished in CsMLO1-silenced and CsMLO2-silenced cucumbers. The defense resistance of CsMLO1-silenced and CsMLO2-silenced cucumbers cotyledon was evaluated following C. cassiicola inoculation for 5 d in transgenic cucumbers (Figure 4). To confirm the role of candidate genes in the defense response of C. cassiicola, we measured the lesion size caused by the pathogen infection. Based on observations and lesion-size measurement results, we found that the sizes of the lesions formed in the cucumber leaves of the non-injected cucumber cotyledons and TRV:00-injected cucumber cotyledons were equivalent. However, the lesion area of the CsMLO1/CsMLO2-silenced cucumber cotyledons was significantly smaller than that of the non-injected cucumber cotyledons and TRV:00-injected groups. The results suggested that CsMLO1-silenced or CsMLO2-silenced enhanced disease resistance to C. cassiicola in cucumber. 2.7. Transient Overexpression of CsMLO1 or CsMLO2 in Cucumber Cotyledons Impairs Resistance to C. cassiicola To further investigate whether the defense responses were affected by CsMLO1/CsMLO2 in cucumber cotyledons, we constructed overexpression vectors containing CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 fused with luciferase (LUC). Agrobacterium carrying LUC:CsMLO1, LUC:CsMLO2, and LUC:00 was infiltrated into the cotyledons of susceptible cucumber (Figure 5). The PCR analysis showed that the introduced genes could be detected in transient overexpression plants by chimeric primers between the CsMLO1/2 and LUC fusion genes (Figure 5A). A firefly luciferase (LUC) complementation imaging assay confirmed the success of the transient overexpression of CsMLO1/2 in vivo (Figure 5B). Strong luminescence signals were detected in the CsMLO1-LUC and CsMLO2-LUC coexpression regions but not in the non-injected cucumber cotyledons. Furthermore, the RT-qPCR assay demonstrated that the expression of the CsMLO1/CsMLO2 genes was enhanced compared with that of the LUC:00-injected cucumber cotyledons (Figure 5C). These results indicated that CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 have been successfully transiently overexpressed in cucumber cotyledons. The defense resistance levels of CsMLO1/CsMLO2-overexpressing cucumber cotyledons were assessed in cotyledons inoculated with C. cassiicola for 5 d. Increased lesion areas were observed in CsMLO1/CsMLO2-overexpressing plants compared with the non-injected and LUC:00-injected plants (Figure 6). Therefore, these results suggested that CsMLO1-overexpressing or CsMLO2-overexpressing in Xintaimici plants showed impaired resistance to C. cassiicola. 2.8. Transgenic Plants Show a Defense Response after C. cassiicola Challenge Based on the previous analysis, we speculated that the gene expression of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 was related to ROS. Detached leaves from the transient overexpression and silenced plants subjected to C. cassiicola were used to measure the accumulation of H2O2 and O2·− using the 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) and nitrotetrazolium (NBT) staining methods, respectively (Figure 7). DAB staining showed that brown spots began to appear in CsMLO1/CsMLO2-silenced plants at 12 hpi (hours post-inoculation), which indicated that H2O2 began to accumulate compared to that in TRV:00 plants. At 24 and 48 hpi, a large area in the leaves was stained, showing that the leaves accumulated high levels of H2O2, which began to weakly decrease at 48 hpi (Figure 7A). However, at 24 hpi, brown spots began to appear in the CsMLO1/CsMLO2-overexpressing plants compared to the silenced plants (Figure 7B). At 48 hpi, deeply colored leaves and H2O2 accumulation were observed in CsMLO1/CsMLO2-overexpressing plants (Figure 7B). In the NBT staining experiment, blue spots began to appear at 12 hpi and large areas of blue began to appear in CsMLO1/CsMLO2-silenced plants at 24 and 48 hpi, whereas the O2·− accumulation began to weakly decrease at 48 hpi compared with 24 hpi (Figure 7A). However, blue spots began to appear at 24 hpi, and large areas of blue began to appear in CsMLO1/CsMLO2-overexpressing plants at 48 hpi (Figure 7B). Thus, outbreaks of ROS in silenced plants appeared earlier than those of the transient overexpression plants following C. cassiicola challenge, suggesting that the silencing of CsMLO1/CsMLO2 inhibited pathogen invasion or effectively initiated the defense responses. Moreover, histochemical staining of detached leaves at different treatment times showed lignin deposition (Figure 7). The accumulation of lignin was observed in CsMLO1/CsMLO2-silenced plants at 12, 24 and 48 h of C. cassiicola challenge (Figure 7A). Maximum lignin deposition was found in CsMLO1/CsMLO2-overexpressing cucumber cotyledons at 48 h following C. cassiicola challenge (Figure 7B). Similarly, silenced plants with C. cassiicola infection showed lignin deposition, and this change appeared earlier than that in the transient overexpression plants. We speculated that the strengthening of the cell wall in silenced plants following infection enhanced resistance and prevented pathogen invasion earlier than that in transient overexpression plants. 2.9. CsMLO1 or CsMLO2 Transgenic Plants Modulate the Expression Levels of Defense-Related Genes To explore whether CsMLO1/CsMLO2-modulated expression influenced disease resistance against C. cassiicola, we analyzed cucumber pathogenesis-related proteins, including PR1-1a (AB698861), PR2 (XM_011661051), and PR3 (HM015248), in transgenic cucumbers (Figure 8). In our experiment, the transcript level of PR1-1a was only upregulated in CsMLO1-silenced cucumber cotyledons. The expression levels of the PR2 and PR3 genes were increased in CsMLO1-silenced and CsMLO2-silenced cucumber cotyledons compared with those of the TRV:00 plants. However, the transcript levels of PR2 and PR3 showed differing degrees of variance and declined in the transient overexpression plants. Based on the above results, we speculate that the CsRP might be involved in the defense pathway by CsMLO1/CsMLO2-induced defense pathways, whereas the CsMLO1-induced defense pathway might be related to the CsRP1-1a gene. 2.10. CsMLO1 Transient Transgenic Plants Modulate the Expression Levels of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS)-Related Genes and Abscisic Acid (ABA) Signaling-Related Genes The above study demonstrated the involvement of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 responses to exogenous H2O2 in cucumber. Next, we investigated whether the ROS formation-related genes were affected in CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 transient transgenic plants (Figure 9). The transcript levels of the CsRbohD (Cucsa.340760) and CsRbohF (Cucsa.107010) genes were significantly increased in CsMLO1-silenced plants and decreased in the CsMLO1-overexpressing plants compared to those of the controls. However, CsRbohD and CsRbohF expression declined in CsMLO2-silenced plants (Figure 9A). Thus, CsMLO1 silencing promoted ROS formation. To further verify these results, we examined antioxidant enzymes in CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 transient transgenic plants (Figure 9B). The activities of total superoxide dismutase (SOD), peroxidase (POD) and catalase (CAT) were higher in CsMLO1-silenced plants than in control plants but were lower in CsMLO1-overexpressing plants than control plants. Subsequently, excess ROS degraded polyunsaturated lipids to form malondialdehyde (MDA); the MDA level was significantly increased in CsMLO1-silenced plants, and opposite results were obtained in CsMLO1-overexpressing plants. However, the activities of these enzymes were decreased or unchanged in CsMLO2-transgenic plants and did not show a regular pattern. In addition, DAB and NBT staining was used to detect H2O2 and O2·− in CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 transgenic plants (Figure 9C). After CsMLO1 silencing, the H2O2 and O2·− levels were significantly increased, resulting in brown and blue spots that were more intense than those in the TRV:00 leaves, whereas the leaf color was not obviously changed in the CsMLO1-overexpressing plants compared with that in the LUC:00 plants. The DAB and NBT staining in all examined CsMLO2 transient transgenic cucumber cotyledon was similar to that of the TRV:00 and LUC:00 leaves. Based on these results, the clear signal pathways between CsMLO1 and ROS were further confirmed. The CsMLO1-silenced plants triggered ROS signaling in cucumber cotyledons as a defense response to C. cassiicola. As mentioned above, the transcript levels of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 responded to exogenous ABA in cucumber. We next assayed the role of CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 in the regulation of endogenous ABA signaling-related genes in transient transgenic cucumber cotyledon (Figure 10). Compared with the control levels, the transcript levels of CsPYL2 (JF789829) and CsPPC2 (JN566067) were significantly increased in CsMLO1-silenced plants (Figure 10A) and decreased in the CsMLO1-overexpressing plants; however, the transcript levels of CsPYL2 and CsPPC2 were reduced in the CsMLO2-silenced and CsMLO2-overexpressing plants. SnRK2.2 (JN566071) expression was almost eliminated in the CsMLO1-silenced cucumbers, and a decreasing pattern also appeared in the CsMLO2-silenced/overexpressing plants. The transcript level of SnRK2.2 was increased in the CsMLO1-overexpressing cucumbers. In contrast, CsABI5 (XM_004149176.2) gene transcription was upregulated at least 30-fold in the CsMLO1-silenced cucumbers compared with the TRV:00-injected cucumbers and slightly decreased in the CsMLO1-overexpressing cucumbers. In addition, the transcript levels of CsABI5 were markedly lower in the CsMLO2-silenced/overexpressing plants than in the TRV:00/LUC:00-injected plants. Our data suggested that CsMLO1 negatively modulated the expression of CsPYL2, CsPP2C2 and CsABI5 and positively modulated the expression of CsSnRK2.2. Based on these findings, we next analyzed the accumulation of endogenous ABA via ELISAs of the cotyledons of transient transgenic cucumbers (Figure 10B). To experimentally verify the above results, we assessed the accumulation of ABA, which was enhanced in the CsMLO1-silenced plants compared with TRV:00 plants, whereas the accumulation of ABA was reduced in the CsMLO1-overexpressing plants compared with LUC:00 plants. The accumulation of endogenous ABA was increased in the CsMLO2-silenced/overexpressing plants. Together, these results suggested that CsMLO1 was a negative regulator of ABA-induced gene expression in the cucumber cotyledons, thus modulating the defense response to C. cassiicola. Although CsMLO1 and CsMLO2 belong to the same family and were highly similar, they may have different mechanisms of action against pathogens.