2. Results 2.1. In Silico Analysis of Regulatory Genes in the Atr BGC Secondary metabolite production is one of the basic processes in Streptomyces and is carefully controlled by subtle and precise regulatory systems [6]. Regulatory and transporter proteins are integral to controlling the biosynthesis of antibiotics. Two LuxR family regulators (Atr1 and Atr2), two ABC transporters (Atr29 and Atr30) and one SARP regulator (Atr32) were found to reside in both upstream and downstream regions of the atr gene cluster. To characterize the function of the LuxR family regulators in production, a widely used in silico analysis was performed. LuxR family transcriptional regulators are key players in important physiological functions and are widely involved in biological processes such as quorum sensing and modulating secondary metabolism [7]. There are two typical functional domains in LuxR family regulators, a signal-binding domain in the N-terminal and a DNA-binding domain with a classical Helix-Turn-Helix (HTH) domain in the C-terminal region [8]. In general, LuxR family proteins bind to DNA in a dimeric form and specifically recognize hallmark sequences of given target gene’s regulatory region [9]. By aligning the amino acid sequences of Atr1 and Atr2 with the LuxR family, including Has2 (ALF39547.1, Streptomyces sp. LZ35) and PimR (CAE51066.1, Streptomyces natalensis), the results revealed that the HTH motifs of the LuxR family were highly conserved (Figure 1), which is mainly responsible for the protein multi-polarization and activation with gene promoters [10,11]. Even though the primary structure of LuxR was quite different, the advanced structure of LuxR was roughly the same enough to perform its positive regulation [12]. The SARP family proteins are generally universal pathway-specific regulators in Streptomyces. Atr32 was annotated as a SARP family transcriptional regulator protein; the full-length protein contains 667 amino acids. The secondary structure prediction indicated that Atr32, like other SARP family proteins, harbors two characteristic domains: the OmpR family at the N-terminal and the transcriptional activation domain (BTAD) located at the C-terminal region [13,14]. In addition, Atr32 contains a functional ATPase domain nucleotide-binding adaptor shared by APAF-1, R proteins and CED-4 (NB-ARC), which is generally considered to act as a molecular switch that toggles between active ATP-bound and inert ADP-bound forms [15]. To compare the amino acid sequence characteristics, other SARP regulators such as ActII-ORF4 (AAK32147.1, Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)), a regulator of actinic purine production, DnrI (AAA26736.1, Streptomyces peucetius), a regulator of daunorubicin biosynthesis, RedD (AAA88556.1, Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)), a regulator of undecyl erythromycin assembly, and the multi-effect regulatory factor AfsR (BAA14186.1, Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)) were aligned and putative active motifs of the proteins were predicted by analysis of the conserved domains (Figure 2). These analyses revealed that the OmpR-like domain likely contains three alpha helices (α1, α2 and α3) whereas the α2, α3 and 10 residue loops form an HTH domain and the W1 and W2 flanks are composed of β-sheets at both ends [16,17]. The α2 helix acts as a scaffold and the α3 helix may be responsible for recognizing the major groove of DNA [16]. The amino acids between the α2 and α3 helices may interact with the alpha subunit of RNA polymerase (RNAP). In addition to other homologous proteins, the BTAD of Atr32 is also composed of seven tetratrico peptide repeats containing intact conserved cores (T1–T7), this architecture is required for functional SARP family proteins [18]. 2.2. In Silico Analysis of Transporter Genes in the Atr BGC The essential synthetic and regulatory genes of most Streptomyces BGCs contain transporter genes belonging to the ATP-binding cassette transporter family [19,20]. Currently, the known ABC transporters are classified into three categories according to their different structural features; these categories are Type I, Type II and Type III [21]. Although research on the ABC transporters within BGCs has been limited to date, it is generally believed that these proteins are involved in both intracellular and extracellular transport of antibiotics and production of their precursors [22]. According to Blastp and multiple sequences alignment, Atr29 contains the conserved Walker A, B motif and ABC signature motif, indicating that it belongs to the Type I sub-family of ABC transporters and might be associated with atratumycin efflux (Figure 3). Unlike the Type I ABC transporter Atr29, Atr30 belongs to the Type II sub-family of ABC transporters. Atr30 appears to be a hydrophilic protein containing nucleotide-binding domains without any hydrophobic transmembrane region and likely functions as a dimeric structure. 2.3. Gene Inactivation and Trans-Complementation of Regulatory and Transporter Genes Based on the above informatics analyses, five genes (atr1, atr2, atr29, atr30 and atr32) were independently inactivated using λ-Red-mediated gene recombination strategies to experimentally determine the detailed function of the regulatory and transporter genes in the atr BGC. Double crossover mutants were verified by the phenotype and the genotype (Supplementary Materials, Figures S1–S5). High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analyses of the fermentation extracts clearly showed that the production of atratumycin in each of the Δatr1, Δatr2, Δatr29 and Δatr30 mutants was completely abolished, whereas the yield of atratumycin in the Δatr32 mutant was significantly improved (Figure 4a, trace X). On the basis of both bioinformatics and the inactivation experiments shown below (Figure 4a, traces VI and VII), it is apparent that Atr29 and Atr30 were involved in atratumycin secretion and/or microbial self defense mechanisms endogenous to the producer. Fascinatingly, disruption of atr32, which encodes a SARP family transcriptional regulator, was found to increase atratumycin titers by ca. 2.3-fold (0.823 g/L), suggesting that Atr32 is normally a suppressor of atratumycin production (Figure 4b). To further validate the proposed functions of the atr1, atr2, atr29, atr30 and atr32 gene products and to disprove possible polarity effects during inactivation experiments, five integrative vectors based on pL646ATE (a pSET152-derived expression plasmid with thiostrepton and apramycin resistance genes) containing each target gene under the control of the ermE*P promoter were constructed independently [23]. The complementation mutants were verified by genotype. As a result, four mutant strains (Δatr1::atr1, Δatr2::atr2, Δatr29::atr29 and Δatr30::atr30) were generated and shown to restore atratumycin production efficiencies on par with the WT producer. As noted above, atratumycin production in S. atratus SCSIO ZH16NS-80S::atr32, the complemented Δatr32 mutant, was found to be dramatically reduced relative to the mutant producer (Figure 4b). These data strongly suggest that, in contrast to all other regulatory/transporter genes identified in the atr cluster, Atr32 likely functions as a suppressor in atratumycin production. 2.4. Construction of the High Producing Strain by Over-Expression of Regulatory and Transporter Genes Since Atr1 and Atr2 have been identified as pathway-specific positive regulators in the biosynthesis of atratumycin, and Atr29 and Atr30 appear to play vital roles in the secretion of atratumycin (or self-defense of the producer), we hypothesized that atratumycin titers could be improved by over-expressing these genes in S. atratus SCSIO ZH16NS-80S. To validate this proposal, the complementation plasmids were introduced into S. atratus SCSIO ZH16NS-80S by conjugation transfer and four over-expression mutants were obtained successfully. As shown in Figure 4b, the mutant strains ZH16NS-80S::atr1 (0.635 g/L), ZH16NS-80S::atr2 (0.690 g/L), ZH16NS-80S::atr29 (0.704 g/L) and ZH16NS-80S::atr30 (0.615 g/L) produced higher titers of atratumycin than the WT strain (0.355 g/L). These data further support positive regulatory roles for atr1 and atr2, as well as protective roles of atr29 and atr30 in the biosynthesis of atratumycin. These findings lay a solid foundation for engineering strategies to optimize atratumycin production. 2.5. Heterologous Expression of Atratumycin Atratumycin is a decadepsipeptide and its gene cluster is 62.7 kb in length. In order to assess the possibility that a gene cluster of this size could be heterologously expressed, a P1-derived artificial chromosome (PAC) library of the S. atratus SCSIO ZH16 genome was constructed using the Escherichia coli-Streptomyces artificial chromosome vector pESAC-13-A (a derivative of pPAC-S1). This vector can be shuttled between E. coli and suitable Streptomyces hosts [24]. The PAC clone 434C containing the entire atr cluster was obtained and introduced into S. coelicolor M1154 by conjugative transfer. Three conjugants were isolated and their genotypes were confirmed by PCR analysis (Supplementary Materials, Figure S7). HPLC analysis of the crude extract produced by culturing these mutant strains under the reported atratumycin production conditions with S. atratus SCSIO ZH16NS-80S (Figure 4a, trace I) and S. coelicolor M1154 (Figure 4a, trace XII) as a control showed a new peak with a same retention time of atratumycin appeared in the recombinant strain (Figure 4a, trace XIII). The further ultraviolet absorption and high resolution electrospray ionization mass spectromerty (HR-ESI-MS) analyses revealed that the new peak in the recombinant strain has a same UV time and very close m/z (Figure 5) in S. atratus SCSIO ZH16NS-80S. These results indicated that the atr gene cluster was successfully expressed in S. coelicolor M1154.