2. Results 2.1. Inhibition of PdGs Synthesis Causes Precocious Onset of S. coelicolor Morphological Differentiation The life cycle of Streptomyces includes radical morphological and physiological changes, particularly at the transition between the vegetative (growth) and the aerial (reproductive) life styles. The onset of PdG production coincides with the transition phase (~40 h) [13] and, in order to assess the impact of PdGs on the development of S. coelicolor, we compared the timing of aerial hyphae formation between the wild-type strain S. coelicolor M145 and its redD mutant M510; the latter is unable to produce PdGs. As shown in Figure 1a, the surface of the culture of the redD mutant grown on the R2YE medium presented the first white spots corresponding to aerial hyphae formation after only 40 h of growth. The surface of the plate was entirely covered with aerial hyphae between 4 and 10 h later. The precocious erection of aerial hyphae in the redD mutant was confirmed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Figure 1b). Indeed, after 48 h, the parental strain (WT) still primarily produced vegetative hyphae, with only very rare evidences of erect aerial hyphae (Figure 1b, panels a and b), at a time when the redD mutant had already formed abundant aerial hyphae (Figure 1b panel c), with occasional spore chains (Figure 1b panel d). At 72 h, the wild-type strain produced erect aerial hyphae (Figure 1b panel e), while the aerial hyphae of the redD mutant had fully differentiated into mature spore chains (Figure 1b panel f). In contrast, when strain S. coelicolor M510 was complemented with the low-copy-number plasmid pELT003 containing redD with its upstream region [13] (strain ET003, see Methods section), we observed both overproduction of PdGs (due to the higher number of copies of redD), and an important delay of the sporulation process (Figure 2). Indeed, strain ET003 presents a phenotype very similar to the bald mutants of S. coelicolor, which are stalled early during development and are unable to erect aerial hyphae. Finally, as additional evidence that PdGs postpone sporulation of S. coelicolor we applied phosphorylated sugars to the R2YE medium, which are known to delay the occurrence of the second round of PCD in S. coelicolor and thus PdG production. As shown in Figure 3, the supply of glucose-6-phosphate (Glc-6P) or glucosamine-6-phosphate (GlcN-6P) to R2YE medium reduces the production of PdGs which ultimately results in early erection of aerial hyphae. The early triggering of the developmental program of strain M510 is also accompanied by an early activation of secondary metabolism, in line with the temporal connection between the two processes. Indeed, actinorhodin production was accelerated by 12 h in the PdG-non-producer M510 as compared to the parent M145, resulting in higher accumulation of this blue-pigmented antibiotic (Figure 4). 2.2. Inhibition of Prodiginine Synthesis Accelerates Transcription of the Late Developmental Genes Given the accelerated development of aerial hyphae in the redD mutant, we wondered whether this acceleration was due to the enhanced expression of key developmental genes. To test this possibility, S. coelicolor M145 and its redD mutant were grown as dispersed colonies and allowed to initiate the developmental program. At 68 h, the parental strain and its redD mutant showed clear morphological differences; the redD mutant colonies were almost completely covered with a thick layer of aerial hyphae, while the wild-type colonies had only begun to produce aerial hyphae (top panels in Figure 5). At this time point, we harvested and lysed the colonies, and quantified total RNAs in the cell lysates using the Nanostring nCounter analysis system as described previously [19]. We tested the expression of 11 genes that span different phases of the developmental program (see heatmap in Figure 5). We considered genes to be differentially expressed if they were at least two-fold different in their expression level, and had p values ≤ 0.02 in a Student’s t-test. Multiple developmental genes showed differential expression in the redD mutant strain. Four developmental genes showed enhanced expression in the redD mutant: bldN, chpA, rdlA, and whiE. BldN is a key sigma factor that is active at a midpoint in the developmental program, and it is required for the raising of aerial hyphae [40]. ChpA and RdlA are representatives of the chaplins and rodlins, respectively, which are small proteins that form a hydrophobic coat on the surface of aerial hyphae and spores [41,42,43,44]. Expression of chpA and rdlA is dependent upon BldN [45]. Chaplins, together with SapB, are also biosurfactant peptides that reduce the surface tension at the colony-air interface in order to allow the erection of aerial filaments from the vegetative mycelium [43]. SapB is the lantibiotic-like peptide resulting from the post-translational modification by RamC from the product of the gene ramS [46]. SapB production is the very last step of the developmental cascade in S. coelicolor and is absolutely required for aerial formation in rich media [43]. However, ramC and ramS have contrasting expression patterns in the redD null mutant (Figure 5). This prevented us from forming a conclusion on the overall expression of the ram gene cluster and therefore on the production of SapB. We therefore could not predict whether the accelerated formation of aerial hyphae in the redD mutant would result from the overproduction of either both chaplins and SapB or only chaplins. Finally, enhanced expression of the whiE cluster for the type II polyketide grey pigment of the spores was also indicative of the early expression of a late sporulation checkpoint [47]. Interestingly, the transcription of bldA, which specifies a leucyl tRNA required for translating the rare UUA codon that is present in many developmental genes [48] was reduced, whereas that of bldH (adpA), which encodes a key positive regulator for multiple developmental genes [49], was unaffected in the redD mutant strain. These two genes are among the first genes of the developmental cascade and are expressed much earlier than SapB and chaplin encoding genes. Since at 68 h, the redD mutant was fully covered with aerial hyphae, and thus SapB and chaplins production already occurred, we hypothesize that the early part of the cascade involving bldA and bldH had already occurred and that their expression had already peaked and receded. Beyond developmental genes, we also observed an increased expression of the actinorhodin biosynthetic gene actI-ORF1 in the redD mutant. Taken together, the enhanced expression of these genes in the redD mutant is consistent with the precocious erection of aerial hyphae (Figure 1, Figure 2 and Figure 3) and the earlier and enhanced actinorhodin production in this strain (Figure 4). 2.3. Survival of S. coelicolor to Prodiginine Production If PdGs are potent killing factors that induce cell death before the onset of morphogenesis, how does S. coelicolor survive their production and manage to reach the later stages of its developmental program? The question is very intriguing because the red biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) responsible for PdGs production does not contain genes classically found in BGCs involved in the production of all other DNA-damaging antibiotics [27]. The current hypothesis for resistance to PdGs would involve a stochastic mechanism generating persister filaments that would survive for being in a metabolically dormant state and therefore insensitive to cell death signals triggering biosynthesis of PdGs (see Discussion). We sought for such viable filaments when S. coelicolor reached its peak of production of PdGs and cell death after 50 h of incubation. Spores of S. coelicolor M145 were spread on the surface of R2YE agar plates, and 0.5-mm thick slices of confluent solid cultures were collected and stained with Syto9 (that stains the DNA of living and dying filaments) as described previously [13]. Confocal fluorescence microscopy allows us to visualize PdG producing filaments by their red autofluorescence (RAF) while Syto9 staining will expose PdG non-producing filaments. In situ visualization of PdGs production revealed important RAF associated with PdG production as previously described [13] (Figure 6a). Within the death zone on the upper part of a S. coelicolor culture, Syto9 staining reveals the occurrence of short filaments that do not display any RAF associated with PdG production (Figure 6a). The small proportion of filaments not producing PdGs is difficult to quantify because they are trapped into the dense network of filaments saturated with PdGs. We ignore why these filaments do not produce PdGs but this absence of production is most likely responsible for their survival during the important cell death round that precedes the erection of the aerial structures devoted to the species preservation [50]. At later time points, the absence of PdG biosynthesis in surviving filaments allows the visualization of their emergence from the mass of dying/dead vegetative hyphae (Figure 6b,c) at the beginning of the differentiation process (raising of aerial mycelium). Filaments emanating from the lysing vegetative mycelium do not display RAF suggesting that hyphae surviving the death round preceding sporulation are those that did not produce PdGs. The survival of S. coelicolor after PdG production would therefore be the consequence of the failure to synthetize PdGs by very small proportion of filaments.