Results Transformation and recovery of transformed lines Nicotiana tabacum cv ‘Hicks’ was transformed via Agrobacterium-mediated transformation as previously described [24]. Independent transformations were done with three genes from C. nicotianae previously shown to be involved in cercosporin autoresistance in the fungus: ATR1, encoding a putative ABC transporter [27]; CFP, encoding a putative MFS transporter [12, 27]; and 71cR, encoding a hypothetical protein [29]. Transformants with ATR1 and CFP utilized haploid plants generated by crossing N. tabacum with Nicotiana africana [40]. Bialaphos-resistant transformed plants were regenerated and rooted in culture, and rooted plants were transferred to soil. Plants were screened by PCR to confirm transformation, and then screened for ATR1 or CFP expression using qPCR (S1 Fig). A sub-set of plants showing high levels of transgene expression were selected, and homozygous doubled haploid lines were generated using a mid-vein culture technique as previously described [24]. Plants regenerated from mid-vein culture were grown to maturity in the greenhouse, and doubled haploid plants were selected based on production of pollen and viable seed. In total, 424 haploid ATR1-transformed plants were isolated, and 21 lines were selected for chromosome doubling based on gene expression. One fertile doubled haploid plant recovered from each of these 21 haploid transformants was used for further analyses. A total of 244 CFP transformed haploid plants were isolated, and 11 were selected for chromosome doubling based on gene expression. One fertile doubled haploid plant from each of the 11 lines was used for further analyses. Agrobacterium-mediated transformation with 71cR was done on diploid plants of cv ‘Hicks’. In this case, rooted plantlets (T0) were grown in soil, and screened by PCR to confirm transformation, and then by qPCR to quantify 71cR expression (S1 Fig). Five transformed plants, four with the highest levels of expression (Lines 4, 7, 14, and 20) and one with the lowest gene expression (Line 9), were selfed, and T1 seed recovered. Seed from each plant was screened in vitro for resistance to bialaphos, and 10 resistant seedlings (T1) from each of the five T0 plants were grown in the greenhouse, allowed to self, and T2 seed harvested. The T2 seed from the 10 plants of each of the five lines were screened in vitro for resistance to bialaphos, and plants producing seed populations that were not segregating for bialaphos resistance (S2 Fig) were scored as homozygous and used for further analyses. Transformation for silencing of cercosporin production utilized RNAi constructs of two genes in the cercosporin biosynthesis pathway [36]: CTB1, encoding the polyketide synthase, the first enzymatic step in the pathway, and CTB8, encoding the pathway transcriptional activator. Transformation was done with haploid cv ‘Hicks’ tobacco plants, and plants were selected using a kanamycin-resistance marker. Plants were assayed by semi-quantitative RT-PCR for expression of the transgene construct, and plants with the highest levels of transgene expression were selected for further analyses. Homozygous doubled haploid plants were generated via mid-vein culture as was described above for ATR1 and CFP. In total, 204 haploid plants transformed with the CTB1 silencing construct were isolated, of which 15 were selected for chromosome doubling based on gene expression; one fertile doubled haploid plant recovered from each of the 15 CTB1-transformants was used for further studies. For CTB8, 340 transformed haploid plants were isolated, with 15 selected for chromosome doubling. One fertile plant from each of these 15 CTB8 transformants was selected for further analysis. Disease resistance, transgene expression and cercosporin resistance of lines transformed with ATR1, CFP, and 71cR Lines transformed for ATR1, CFP, and 71cR were assayed for transgene expression and disease resistance under greenhouse conditions. With ATR1, two lines were identified that showed significant reduction in disease symptoms as compared to the control cv ‘Hicks’ (Fig 1A). Infected leaves developed lesions, but the lesions remained small, and did not expand (Fig 2). Differences in symptom development between the transgenic lines and wild type were analyzed using the Sattherwaite-Smith-Welch test [41, 42]. Gene expression analysis (Fig 1B) showed high levels of expression of ATR1 in all transgenic plants except for line 405. Results of the one-way ANOVA combined with post hoc comparisons of normalized transcripts using Dunnett’s test with Line 405 as the control group, indicated that the expression of ATR1 construct was statistically significant in all transgenic lines (p ≤ 0.05). 10.1371/journal.pone.0230362.g001Fig 1Disease response and transgene expression in ATR1-transformed lines.A. Disease response of 12-week old ATR1-transformed doubled haploid lines inoculated with C. nicotianae. Controls included a vector-transformed line (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Disease severity was assayed as the number of coalesced lesions at 6 weeks post-inoculation and is shown relative to severity of cv ‘Hicks’. Data shown are results of two independent experiments with 5 plants/line in each experiment. The within-group differences between the different ATR1-transformed lines were examined using Satterthwaite-Smith-Welch test. Lines with p ≤ 0.05 were considered to be significant (denoted by asterisks). B.
ATR1 transgene expression in 10-week old non-inoculated plants. Samples were normalized to tobacco polyubiquitin gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript (Line 405) as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to the lowest expressor (Line 405). Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. Disease response and transgene expression in ATR1-transformed lines. A. Disease response of 12-week old ATR1-transformed doubled haploid lines inoculated with C. nicotianae. Controls included a vector-transformed line (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Disease severity was assayed as the number of coalesced lesions at 6 weeks post-inoculation and is shown relative to severity of cv ‘Hicks’. Data shown are results of two independent experiments with 5 plants/line in each experiment. The within-group differences between the different ATR1-transformed lines were examined using Satterthwaite-Smith-Welch test. Lines with p ≤ 0.05 were considered to be significant (denoted by asterisks). B.
ATR1 transgene expression in 10-week old non-inoculated plants. Samples were normalized to tobacco polyubiquitin gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript (Line 405) as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to the lowest expressor (Line 405). Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. 10.1371/journal.pone.0230362.g002Fig 2Symptoms on wild-type cv ‘Hicks’ and transformed plants inoculated with C. nicotianae.Top: Resistant ATR1-transformed Lines 337 and 412 as compared to symptoms on cv ‘Hicks’ and the vector control. Middle: Resistant 71cR-transformed Lines 20–1 and 7–2 as compared to symptoms on cv ‘Hicks’ and the 9–1 lowest-expression control. Bottom: Symptoms on lines 123 and 169 transformed with silencing constructs for CTB1 as compared to cv ‘Hicks’ and the vector control. Symptoms on wild-type cv ‘Hicks’ and transformed plants inoculated with C. nicotianae. Top: Resistant ATR1-transformed Lines 337 and 412 as compared to symptoms on cv ‘Hicks’ and the vector control. Middle: Resistant 71cR-transformed Lines 20–1 and 7–2 as compared to symptoms on cv ‘Hicks’ and the 9–1 lowest-expression control. Bottom: Symptoms on lines 123 and 169 transformed with silencing constructs for CTB1 as compared to cv ‘Hicks’ and the vector control. In contrast to ATR1, no statistically significant disease resistance was seen in CFP-transformed plants relative to controls (Fig 3A). As with ATR1-transformed plants, high transgene expression was found in all lines, and was statistically significant as compared to Line 54, used as the control (Fig 3B). 10.1371/journal.pone.0230362.g003Fig 3Disease response and transgene expression in CFP-transformed lines.A. Disease response of 12-week old double haploid CFP-transformed lines inoculated with C. nicotianae. Controls included a vector-transformed line (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Disease severity was assayed as the number of coalesced lesions at 6 weeks post-inoculation and shown relative to severity of cv ‘Hicks’. Data shown are results of three independent experiments with 5 plants/line in each experiment. The within-group differences between the different CFP-transformed lines were examined using Satterthwaite-Smith-Welch test. There were no significant differences between lines (p ≤ 0.05). B.
CFP transgene expression in 10-week old non-inoculated plants. Samples were normalized to tobacco polyubiquitin gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript (Line 54) as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to the lowest expressor (Line 54). Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. Disease response and transgene expression in CFP-transformed lines. A. Disease response of 12-week old double haploid CFP-transformed lines inoculated with C. nicotianae. Controls included a vector-transformed line (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Disease severity was assayed as the number of coalesced lesions at 6 weeks post-inoculation and shown relative to severity of cv ‘Hicks’. Data shown are results of three independent experiments with 5 plants/line in each experiment. The within-group differences between the different CFP-transformed lines were examined using Satterthwaite-Smith-Welch test. There were no significant differences between lines (p ≤ 0.05). B.
CFP transgene expression in 10-week old non-inoculated plants. Samples were normalized to tobacco polyubiquitin gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript (Line 54) as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to the lowest expressor (Line 54). Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. With 71cR, three lines were identified that showed significant reduction in disease symptoms as compared to the control cv ‘Hicks’ (Fig 4A). Gene expression analysis (Fig 4B) confirmed high expression of 71cR in all lines with the exception of Line 9–1 that was used as a low-expression control (Fig 4B). 10.1371/journal.pone.0230362.g004Fig 4Disease response and transgene expression in 71cR-transformed lines.A. Disease response of 12-week old 71cR-transformed lines inoculated with C. nicotianae. Controls included the lowest expressor line 9–1 (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Disease severity was assayed as the number of coalesced lesions at 4 weeks post-inoculation and shown relative to severity of cv ‘Hicks’. Data shown are results of two independent experiments with 5 plants/line in each experiment. The within-group differences between the different 71cR-transformed lines were examined using Satterthwaite-Smith-Welch test. Lines with p ≤ 0.05 were considered to be significant (denoted by asterisks). B.
71cR transgene expression in 10-week old non-inoculated plants. Samples were normalized to tobacco elongation factor 1-alpha gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript (Line 9–1) as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to the lowest expressor (Line 9–1, checkered bar). Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. Disease response and transgene expression in 71cR-transformed lines. A. Disease response of 12-week old 71cR-transformed lines inoculated with C. nicotianae. Controls included the lowest expressor line 9–1 (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Disease severity was assayed as the number of coalesced lesions at 4 weeks post-inoculation and shown relative to severity of cv ‘Hicks’. Data shown are results of two independent experiments with 5 plants/line in each experiment. The within-group differences between the different 71cR-transformed lines were examined using Satterthwaite-Smith-Welch test. Lines with p ≤ 0.05 were considered to be significant (denoted by asterisks). B.
71cR transgene expression in 10-week old non-inoculated plants. Samples were normalized to tobacco elongation factor 1-alpha gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript (Line 9–1) as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to the lowest expressor (Line 9–1, checkered bar). Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. Disease resistance and gene silencing in plants transformed with silencing constructs for CTB1 and CTB8 Plants transformed with CTB1 and CTB8 silencing constructs were inoculated and disease severity was assayed as described above for plants transformed for expression of the cercosporin-resistance genes. Plants transformed to silence CTB1 showed high levels of resistance compared to cv ‘Hicks’ (Fig 5A), with 6 of 14 lines assayed showing significantly less disease. Symptoms on resistant plants were similar to what was seen with the ATR1-transformed plants, with smaller lesions that did not expand (Fig 2). Analysis of transgene expression in non-inoculated plants (Fig 5B) with one-way ANOVA indicated that were significant differences between the normalized transcripts. Post hoc comparisons of normalized transcripts using Dunnett’s test with Line 58 as the control group indicated that the expression of the CTB1 construct was statistically significant in six lines (p ≤ 0.05). Lines 29, 36, 123, and 169 that had statistically significant CTB1 construct expression were also found to be highly resistant to the pathogen. Although the CTB1 construct was highly expressed in Lines 3 and 8, no significant disease resistance was found. However, Lines 15 and 129, that did not have statistically significant CTB1 expression, were found to be highly resistant to the pathogen. Silencing of the fungal CTB1 was also assayed by examining the fungal CTB1 transcripts from plants 5-weeks post-inoculation using qPCR (Fig 5C). Results from a one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s test using normalized fungal CTB1 transcripts from cv ‘Hicks’ as control, revealed that Line 123 had statistically significant lower amount of normalized CTB1 transcripts (p ≤ 0.05). Therefore, Line 123, the most resistant of the lines assayed did show the greatest silencing of CTB1; silencing of CTB1, however, could not be detected in other lines that showed resistance to disease. 10.1371/journal.pone.0230362.g005Fig 5Disease response, transgene expression, and silencing of fungal CTB1 expression in plants transformed with a silencing construct for CTB1.A. Disease response of transformed lines inoculated with C. nicotianae. Controls included a vector-transformed line (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Disease severity was assayed as the number of coalesced lesions at 4 weeks post-inoculation (Fig 2) and are shown relative to severity of cv ‘Hicks’. Data shown are results of two independent experiments with 5 plants/line in each experiment. The within-group differences between the different CTB1 transformed lines were examined using Satterthwaite-Smith-Welch test. Lines with p ≤ 0.01 were considered to be significant (denoted by asterisks). B.
CTB1 transgene construct expression in 10-week old non-inoculated plants. Samples were normalized to tobacco polyubiquitin gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript (Line 58) as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to the lowest expressor (Line 58). Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. C. Expression of fungal CTB1 in selected infected CTB1 transformed lines, vector control, and cv ‘Hicks’ at 5-weeks post-inoculation. Controls included a vector-transformed line (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Samples were normalized to fungal actin gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript of ‘Hicks’ as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to ‘Hicks’ expression. Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. Disease response, transgene expression, and silencing of fungal CTB1 expression in plants transformed with a silencing construct for CTB1. A. Disease response of transformed lines inoculated with C. nicotianae. Controls included a vector-transformed line (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Disease severity was assayed as the number of coalesced lesions at 4 weeks post-inoculation (Fig 2) and are shown relative to severity of cv ‘Hicks’. Data shown are results of two independent experiments with 5 plants/line in each experiment. The within-group differences between the different CTB1 transformed lines were examined using Satterthwaite-Smith-Welch test. Lines with p ≤ 0.01 were considered to be significant (denoted by asterisks). B.
CTB1 transgene construct expression in 10-week old non-inoculated plants. Samples were normalized to tobacco polyubiquitin gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript (Line 58) as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to the lowest expressor (Line 58). Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. C. Expression of fungal CTB1 in selected infected CTB1 transformed lines, vector control, and cv ‘Hicks’ at 5-weeks post-inoculation. Controls included a vector-transformed line (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Samples were normalized to fungal actin gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript of ‘Hicks’ as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to ‘Hicks’ expression. Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. Only one of 14 lines assayed that were transformed with the CTB8 silencing construct showed resistance to disease relative to cv ‘Hicks’ or the vector control (Fig 6A). Transgene expression analysis in non-inoculated plants (Fig 6B) using normalized CTB8 from Line 302 as a control, revealed that the CTB8 construct was highly expressed and was statistically significant in all lines (p ≤ 0.05). CTB8 is the pathway regulator, and deletion of CTB8 abolishes expression of all genes in the CTB pathway including CTB1 [36]. We thus assayed for silencing of CTB1 as a measure of silencing of the pathway. Results using normalized fungal CTB1 transcripts from cv ‘Hicks’ as control, revealed that Line 302 had a statistically significant lower amount of normalized CTB1 transcripts (p ≤ 0.05, Fig 6C). Thus, Line 302 that was the lowest expressor of the CTB8 construct also showed the greatest amount of silencing, although this did not lead to disease resistance. 10.1371/journal.pone.0230362.g006Fig 6Disease response, transgene expression, and silencing of fungal CTB1 expression in plants transformed with a silencing construct for CTB8.A. Disease response of transformed lines inoculated with C. nicotianae. Controls included a vector-transformed line (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Disease severity was assayed as the number of coalesced lesions at 4 weeks post-inoculation, and are shown relative to severity of cv ‘Hicks’. Data shown are results of two independent experiments with 5 plants/line in each experiment. The within-group differences between the different CTB8 transformed lines were examined using Satterthwaite-Smith-Welch test. Lines with p ≤ 0.01 were considered to be significant (denoted by asterisk). B.
CTB8 transgene construct expression in 10-week old non-inoculated plants. Samples were normalized to tobacco alpha-tubulin gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript (Line 302) as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to the lowest expressor (Line 302). Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. C. Expression of fungal CTB1 in selected CTB8-silenced transformed lines, vector control, and cv ‘Hicks’ at 5-weeks post-inoculation. Controls included a vector-transformed line (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Samples were normalized to fungal actin gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript of ‘Hicks’ as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to ‘Hicks’ expression. Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. Disease response, transgene expression, and silencing of fungal CTB1 expression in plants transformed with a silencing construct for CTB8. A. Disease response of transformed lines inoculated with C. nicotianae. Controls included a vector-transformed line (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Disease severity was assayed as the number of coalesced lesions at 4 weeks post-inoculation, and are shown relative to severity of cv ‘Hicks’. Data shown are results of two independent experiments with 5 plants/line in each experiment. The within-group differences between the different CTB8 transformed lines were examined using Satterthwaite-Smith-Welch test. Lines with p ≤ 0.01 were considered to be significant (denoted by asterisk). B.
CTB8 transgene construct expression in 10-week old non-inoculated plants. Samples were normalized to tobacco alpha-tubulin gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript (Line 302) as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to the lowest expressor (Line 302). Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates. C. Expression of fungal CTB1 in selected CTB8-silenced transformed lines, vector control, and cv ‘Hicks’ at 5-weeks post-inoculation. Controls included a vector-transformed line (checkered bar) and the susceptible tobacco cv ‘Hicks’ (hatched bar). Samples were normalized to fungal actin gene expression. Statistical significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA combined with Dunnett’s multiple comparison analysis using the lowest normalized transcript of ‘Hicks’ as the control group. Gene expression was considered statistically significant with p ≤ 0.05 (denoted by asterisks). Fold-change gene expression is shown on a log10 scale relative to ‘Hicks’ expression. Error bars indicate standard error from three biological replicates. Each biological replicate was tested with three technical replicates.