3. Results 3.1. General Genomic Features of Strain KR2-7 The assembled genome of B. inaquosorum KR2-7 contained 4 contigs, with an N50 of 2,144,057 bp and 700X sequence coverage. The KR2-7 genome was obtained with a length of 4,248,657 bp, the G+C content of 43.1%, and 4265 predicted genes consisting of 4017 protein-coding genes, 50 rRNA genes, and 83 tRNA genes. Interestingly, strain KR2-7 possesses the larger number of genes contributing to amino acid transport and metabolism (322 genes), carbohydrate transport and metabolism (278 genes), inorganic ion transport and metabolism (200 genes), and secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism (76) compared to the reputable biocontrol agent B. velezensis strain FZB42 (Figure S1; Table S1). Therefore, the genome content of KR2-7 indicates that the strain has considerable potential as a biocontrol agent. The genome sequence of B. inaquosorum KR2-7 was deposited in NCBI GenBank under the accession number QZDE00000000.2. 3.2. Genome Phylogeny The genomes of 31 Bacillus strains were selected for aligning with the KR2-7 genome and phylogenomic analysis. The selected strains and their corresponding genome sequence accession numbers were presented in Table 1. Selected Bacillus strains were accurately distributed on branches of the maximum likelihood phylogenomic tree (Figure 1). Moreover, closely related Bacillus species such as B. amyloliquefaciens and B. velezensis were distributed on the same branch (Figure 1). The genome-based phylogeny approaches well recognized B. methylotrophicus, B. amyloliquefaciens subsp. plantarum, and B. oryzicola as the heterotypic synonyms of B. velezensis [30]. Recently, three subspecies of Bacillus subtilis, including B. subtilis subsp. inaquosorum, B. subtilis subsp. Spizizenii, and B. subtilis subsp. stercoris were promoted to species status through comparative genomics. Each subspecies encompasses unique bioactive secondary metabolite genes which cause the unique phenotypes [31]. According to REALPHY results, strain KR2-7 was identified as B. inaquosorum, owing to being placed within the B. subtilis branch close to B. subtilis subsp. inaquosorum strain KCTC 13429 and strain DE111 in the phylogenomic tree (Figure 1). Notably, the results of ANI and GGDC analysis were consistent with REALPHY results as the KR2-7 genome displayed the highest ANI values (99.26%) and the lowest GGDC values (0.0075) with respect to the genome of strain KCTC 13429 (Table 1). Interestingly, the phylogeny analysis of several B. amyloliquefaciens strains based on core-genome was consistent with the ANI and GGDC values [32]. Altogether, the aforesaid genome-based phylogeny approaches identified strain KR2-7 as Bacillus inaquosorum. 3.3. Secondary Metabolites Biosynthetic Gene Clusters in the KR2-7 Genome Genome mining of the strain KR2-7 revealed that more than 700 kb (i.e., nearly 17% of the genome) is devoted to 13 putative BGCs. Of the 13 found BGCs, nine were identified to contain one polyketide synthase (PKS) for macrolactin; five non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) for bacillibactin, bacillomycin F, bacilysin, fengycin, and surfactin; one PKS-NRPS hybrid synthetases (PKS-NRPS) for bacillaene; one thiopeptide synthase for subtilosin A, and one head-to-tail cyclised peptide for the sporulation killing factor. The nine annotated BGCs encode secondary metabolites which contribute to plant growth promotion through the fungal/bacterial pathogen suppression, ISR, nutrient uptake, and plant colonization (Table 2) [33,34,35,36]. The distribution of identified BGCs within the KR2-7 genome underlies its vigorous potential in plant disease biocontrol application [16]. The coding genes of secondary metabolites in KR2-7 were different from those in B. velezensis FZB42, while these genes showed more similarity with those in B. subtilis 168 (Table 2). Interestingly, the BGC of bacillomycin F in KR2-7 was absent in B. subtilis 168 and B. velezensis FZB42 (Table 2) as this gene cluster conserved in B. inaquosorum [31]. Moreover, the KR2-7 genome contains four unannotated BGCs (data not shown) which showed less similarity to compounds listed in the MIBiG database. 3.4. Antifungal Secondary Metabolites Production in Strain KR2-7 The KR2-7 genome mining showed that this strain harbors three BGCs with antifungal function, including fengycin, surfacing, and bacillomycin F (a variant of iturin) belonging to Bacillus cyclic-lipopeptides (CLPs). Bacillus CLPs represented the powerful fungitoxicity properties by interfering with cell membrane integrity, permeabilizing the cell membrane, and perturbing membrane osmotic balance due to the formation of ion-conducting pores [37]. Strain KR2-7 not only suppressed the Fusarium wilt of tomato caused by Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici [16] but also showed a broad-spectrum antifungal activity towards various phytopathogenic fungi including Alternaria alternata f. sp. lycopersici, Athelia rolfsii, Botrytis cinerea, Rhizoctonia solani, and Verticillium albo-atrum (Figure 2). Fengycin (plipastatin), the powerful fungitoxic compound—especially against filamentous fungi [37]—is synthesized by NRPS and encoded by a 39302 bp gene cluster with five genes including ppsA-E in KR2-7, which showed a 92% and 72.05% similarity to the fengycin gene cluster of B. subtilis 168 and B. amyloliquefacience FZB42, respectively (Table 2). The first three genes (ppsABC) each encode two amino acid modules. The fourth gene (ppsD) encodes three amino acid modules, and the last gene (ppsE) encodes one amino acid module (Figure 3). Ions of m/z values 1471.8, 1485.7, 1487.9, 1499.9, 1501.9, 1513.8, 1515.9, 1527.8 1529.9 and, 1543.8 were observed in a whole-cell surface extract of KR2-7 grown on a dual culture plate (thereafter, dual culture cell extract) and assigned to C15 to C18 fengycin homologues while in the whole-cell surface extract of KR2-7 grown on the control plate (thereafter, control cell extract) only four aforesaid peaks (m/z 1501.9, 1515.9, 1529.9 and, 1543.8) were detected (Table 3, Figure S2). The result indicated that the KR2-7 strain secreted various fengycin homologues to inhibit the growth of Fol. More strikingly, a 37074 bp gene cluster encoding bacillomycin F was also identified immediately downstream of the fengycin gene cluster of KR2-7 (Figure 4). The bacillomycin F is one of seven main variants within the iturin family [40] encoded by a gene cluster consisting of four genes designated ituD, ituA, ituB and, ituC. The gene cluster code a cyclic heptapeptide in which the first three amino acids are shared among iturin family members, whereas the remaining four amino acids are conserved in B. inaquosorum [31]. Furthermore, iturins are characterized by a heptapeptide of α-amino acids attached to a β-amino fatty acid chain with a length of 14 to 17 carbons [37]. They possess potent antifungal activity against a wide variety of fungi and yeast, but bounded antibacterial and no antiviral actions [41,42,43]. Furthermore, these molecules also showed strong haemolytic activity, which limits their clinical use [44]. The antifungal mechanism of iturins launches by their interaction with the target cell membrane and osmotic perturbation of the membrane, owing to the formation of ion-conducting pores. Subsequently, the change in the permeability of a membrane is conducive to the release of biomolecules, such as proteins, nucleotides, and lipids from cells, which ultimately causes cell death [44,45]. In the dual culture cell extract of KR2-7, six mass peaks assigned to C16, C18 and C19 forms of iturin were observed while they were absent in the control cell extract of KR2-7 (Table 4, Figure S3). This result indicated that strain KR2-7 produced different variants of iturins to limit the growth of Fol hyphae. Similar to fengycin, surfactin was synthesized by NRPS and encoded by a srf gene cluster that spans 26073 bp in the KR2-7 genome. The gene cluster harbors four genes (srfAA-AD) and showed a 92.20% and 74.65% similarity to those of B. subtilis 168 and B. amyloliquefacience FZB42, respectively. The product of the srf gene cluster is a linear array of seven modules, six of which are encoded by srfAA and srfAB genes and the last module is encoded by a srfAC gene (Figure 5). The fourth gene (srfAD) encodes thioesterase/acyltransferase (Te/At-domain) which triggers surfactin biosynthesis [37]. Hence, the sfp gene encodes an essential enzyme (phosphopantetheinyl transferase) for the non-ribosomal synthesis of lipopeptides and the synthesis of polyketides. The regulatory gene yczE encoding an integral membrane protein was detected within the KR2-7 genome (Figure 5). Surfactin enables bacteria cells to interact with plant cells as a bacterial elicitor for stimulating ISR [37], especially through the activation of jasmonate- and salicylic acid-dependent signaling pathways [46]. Several studies indicated the ISR-elicitor role of surfactin against phytopathogens in various host plants, e.g., tomato [47], wheat [48], citrus fruit [49], lettuce [50], and grapevine [51]. Comparing the MALDI-TOF mass spectra of KR2-7 grown on a PDA control and dual culture revealed that surfactin contributed to the suppression of Fol as eight mass peaks assigned to C13, C14 and C15 surfactin homologs were detected in dual culture cell extracts, while only four of which were observed in the control cell extract (Table 5, Figure S3). Furthermore, the bacterium produced more surfactin to suppress Fol. Additionally, C14 and C15 surfactin tend to stimulate stronger ISR rather than those with shorter chain lengths [47]. Moreover, suppression of taxonomically diverse fungal pathogens including Fusarium oxysporum, F. moniliforme, F. solani, F. verticillioides, Magnaporthe grisea, Saccharicola bicolor, Cochliobolus hawaiiensis, and Alternaria alternata by the surfactin family demonstrated that surfactins are strong fungitoxic compounds [52,53,54,55]. 3.5. Antibacterial Secondary Metabolites Production in Strain KR2-7 The KR2-7 genome contained six BGCs coding for antibacterial compounds including bacillaene and macrolactin, sporulation killing factor (skf), subtilosin A, bacilysin, and surfactin. Several studies on surfactin and its isoforms proved that these metabolites played a major role in combating bacterial plant diseases, such as fruit bloch caused by Acidovorax citrulli in melon [56], tomato wilt caused by Ralstonia solanacearum [57], and root infection by Pseudomonas syringae in Arabidopsis [58]. Moreover, surfactin produced by B. subtilis R14 exhibited pronounced antagonistic efficacy against several multidrug-resistance bacterial strains of Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and Enteroccoccus faecalis [59]. Bacillaene is a polyketide known as a selective bacteriostatic agent that inhibits prokaryotic, not eukaryotic growth by disrupting protein synthesis [60]. Its antimicrobial efficacy against various bacteria (Myxococcus xanthus and Staphylococcus aureus) and fungi (Fusarium spp) have been reported [60,61,62]. In the KR2-7 genome, bacillaene was synthesized by a PKS/NRPS hybrid pathway and encoded by a giant pks gene cluster (76.355 Kbp) containing 16 genes (pksA-S and acpK) showing an 89.63% and 75.25% similarity to those of B. subtlis 168 and B. velezensis FZB42, respectively (Table 2, Figure 6B). Another polyketide, macrolactin, can be encoded by a 54.225 kbp gene cluster in strain KR2-7 and showed a 74.12% similarity to the mln cluster of B. velezensis FZB42 (Table 2, Figure 6A). Macrolactins are a large class of macrolide antibiotics that inhibited the growth of several bacteria, including Ralstonia solanacearum, Staphylococcus aureus, and Burkholderia epacian [63,64]. In the dual culture cell extract of KR2-7, one ion corresponding to 7-o-succinyl macrolactin A ([M + Na]+ = 525.4), and another ion corresponding to bacillaene A ([M + H]+ = 583.5) were detected (Figure 6C,D), while they were not observed in the control cell extract of KR2-7. Bacilysin (also known as tetaine) is a dipeptide suppressing a wide variety of destructive phytopathogenic bacteria, e.g., Erwinia amylovora, Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae, X. oryzae pv. Oryzicola, and Clavibacter michiganense subsp. sepedonicum [65,66,67]. This bactericidal property is due to the inhibition of glucosamine-6- phosphate synthase by the anticapsin moiety of bacilysin. Its inhibition represses the biosynthesis of peptidoglycans, the essential constituents of the bacterial cell wall [68,69]. In the KR2-7 genome, bacilysin can be encoded by a 7128 bp bac gene cluster consisting of seven genes (bacA-E, ywfAG), and display high gene similarity to those of B. subtilis 168 (Table 2, Figure 7). This metabolite and its derivatives were detected neither in the KR2-7 control cell extract nor dual culture cell extract, likely due to culture conditions or the assay method. Furthermore, the KR2-7 genome encompassed two distinct gene clusters encoding bacteriocins, including subtilosin A and sporulation killing factors (SKFs). Subtilosin A is a macrocyclic anionic antimicrobial peptide originally obtained from wild-type strain B. subtilis 168 [70] but is also produced by B. amyloliquefaciens and B. atrophaeus [71,72]. This bacteriocin displayed a bactericidal effect on a broad spectrum of bacteria, including Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and both aerobes and anaerobes [73], possibly through an interaction with membrane-associated receptors, or binding to the outer cell membrane, and is conducive to membrane permeabilization [73,74,75]. Subtilosin A is ribosomally synthesized by an alb gene cluster containing eight genes (albA-G, sboA) spanning 6.8 kbp in the KR2-7 genome (Figure 8). The sboA gene encodes presubtilosin, and albA-G genes encode proteins whose functions are presubtilosin processing and subtilosin export [76]. The mass peaks corresponding to subtilosin A and its homologs appeared neither in the KR2-7control cell extract nor the dual culture cell extract. These peaks are detectable by altering the culture condition and/or evaluating the procedure. The KR2-7 genome also harbored a 5976 bp skf gene cluster encompassing skfABCEFGH, and involves the production and release of killing factors during sporulation (Figure 9). During the early stages of sporulation, sporulating cells of B. subtilis exude extracellular killing factors to kill the nonsporulating sister cells whose immunity to these toxins was not developed. As a result, the nutrient from the dead cells are released and then used by the sporulating cells to resume their growth. This phenomenon is termed “cannibalism” and causes a delay in sporulation [77,78]. The SKF bacteriocin produced by the sporulating cells can destroy other soil-inhabiting bacteria. Similarly, the expression of skf genes in B. subtilis inhibits the growth of X. orzae pv. oryzae, the causative agent of rice bacterial blight [79]. 3.6. Plant Colonization by Strain KR2-7 The most crucial step for a PGPR (Plant Growth Promoting Rhizobacteria) agent to survive, enhance plant growth, and suppress plant disease is the efficient colonization of plant tissues. The plant colonization process comprises two steps. In the first step, PGPR agents reach the surface of plant tissue either by passive movement in water flow or by flagellar movement. The second step is to establish the plant-bacterium interaction reliant on bacterial biofilm formation [36,80]. The KR2-7 genome harbored the gene clusters for flagellar assembly (flg cluster, flh cluster and, fli cluster) and bacterial chemotaxis (che cluster) together with other genes known to be necessary for swarming motility, including hag, two stator elements (motAB), as well as regulatory genes swrAA, swrAB, swrB and, swrC (Table 6). In the step of efficient colonization, the PGPR agent forms bacterial biofilm and not only strengthens the plant-bacterium interaction but protects the plant root system as a bio-barrier against pathogen attacks [80]. The main component of bacterial biofilm is the extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) with a chemical composition including proteins, neutral polysaccharides, charged polymers, and amphiphilic molecules [80]. The eps cluster (epsC-O) encoding exopolysaccharide of biofilm and its regulatory genes sinR and arbA (repressors) and, sinI (antirepressor), the yqxM-sipW-tasA gene cluster encoding amyloid fiber (TasA protein of biofilm) and pgcA encoding phosphoglucomutase were found in the KR2-7 genome (Table 6). Moreover, the involvement of surfactin in cell adhesion and biofilm formation due to its 3D topology and amphiphilic nature has been illustrated [81,82]. Baise et al. [58] declared that deleting surfactin gene expression in B. subtilis strain 6051 led to disability to form robust biofilm on Arabidopsis root surface, and reduced the suppression of disease caused by Pseudomonas syringae. Besides, the deficiency in surfactin production in B. subtilis, strain UMAF6614 resulted in a biofilm formation defect on melon phylloplane and partially reduced the suppression of bacterial soft root rot, bacterial leaf spot, and cucurbit powdery-mildew by the biocontrol stain [83]. 3.7. Genes Involved in Bacterium-Plant Interactions Quite apart from the antagonistic mechanisms of bacterial biocontrol strains, these bacterial microorganisms are also involved in plant growth augmentation through making nutrients available for host plants, production of plant growth-promotion hormones, and the induction of systemic resistance within the plant by specific metabolite secretion [96,97]. Similar to other biocontrol microorganisms, the KR2-7 genome contains the genes/gene clusters related to plant growth promotion (Table 6). The KR2-7 genome contained moaA-E genes encoding molybdenum cofactor and may be a relic of a nitrogen-fixing gene cluster or a cofactor for nitrogen assimilation [80]. Moreover, the genes for nitrate reduction (narG-J), nitrate transport (narK), probable transcription regulator genes (arfM), regulatory protein (fnr), an ammonium acid transporter (nrgA), and its regulator gene (nrgB), along with the nas gene cluster (nasA-F), were also identified in the KR2-7 genome. The nas gene cluster is involved in nitrite transport and reduction (Table 6). In addition to nitrogen assimilation, the KR2-7 genome encompassed potassium transporting genes, including ktr system potassium uptake proteins (ktrA-D), a putative potassium channel protein (yugO), and putative gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase (ykqA) [80,98]. Furthermore, the presence of genes for transportation of magnesium (mgtE, corA), ferrochrome (yvdK), manganese (mntH), and a gene cluster for manganese binding/transport (mntA-D), along with the transcription regulator protein (mntR), were identified in the KR2-7 genome. These genes uptake the nutrients or detoxify the heavy metal ions for both the bacteria and host plants [80]. An 11.7 kb dhb gene cluster (dhbABDEF) encoding siderophore bacillibactin was identified in the KR2-7 genome. Furthermore, ions of m/z values 883.4 and 905.2 were detected in the KR2-7dual culture cell extract and were identified as bacillibactin [M + H]+ and bacillibactin [M + Na]+ (Figure 10) by comparison with previously reported data [99,100]. Notably, the molecular ion peaks corresponding to bacillibactin were not observed in the control cell extract of KR2-7. Siderophores are low-molecular-weight molecules with a high affinity for ferric iron that solubilize iron from minerals and organic compounds under iron limitation conditions [101]. Siderophore-producing bacterial strains impact plant health by supplying iron to the host plants [102,103], depriving fungal pathogens of iron [104], and suppressing fungal phytopathogens, including F. oxysporum f. sp. capsici [105] and Phytophthora capsici [106]. Furthermore, it was reported that siderophores mitigate heavy metal contamination of soil through the formation of a stable complex with environmental toxic metals such as Al, Cd, Cu, Ga, In, Pb, and Zn [101]. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) produced by PGPR agents play a significant role in promoting plant growth through the regulation of synthesis or metabolism of phytohormones [107], the induction of systemic disease resistance [108,109], and the control of plant pathogens [110]. A 2,3-butanediol and 3-hydroxy-2-butanone (acetoin) are the best-known growth-promoting VOCs that produced B. subtilis and B. amyloliquefaciens. The genome of the KR2-7 harbored als gene cluster (alsR, alsS, alsD), along with the bdhA gene is together required for the biosynthesis pathway of 2,3-butanediol from pyruvate. In this pathway, alsS encodes the acetolactate synthase enzyme, which catalyzes the condensation of two pyruvate molecules into acetolactate. Then, acetolactate decarboxylase, encoded by alsD, converts decarboxylate acetolactate into acetoin. The alsR regulates two aforesaid steps. Finally, the bdhA encoded (R, R)-butanediol dehydrogenase enzyme catalyzes 3-hydroxy-2-butanone (acetoin) to 2,3-butanediol [111]. In addition, the KR2-7 genome contained ilvH, ilvB, ilvC genes and a leu gene cluster (leuABCD) which are required for the biosynthesis pathway of three branched-chain amino acids (BCAA), including leucine, isoleucine, and valine. Acetolactate is a central metabolite between 2,3-butanediol and BCAA biosynthesis and can involve in both anabolism and catabolism by acetolactate decarboxylase. It was reported that acetolactate decarboxylase is an enzyme with a dual role that can direct acetolactate flux to catabolism in favour of valine and leucine biosynthesis or can catalyze the second step of the 2, 3-butanediol anabolism pathway [112]. Bacillus spp. can enhance plant growth through the synthesis of plant growth-promoting hormones, such as auxin, indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), and gibberellic acid. The genome of KR2-7 may encompass genes/gene clusters responsible for the biosynthesis of indole acetic acid, phytase, and trehalose (Table 6). Moreover, a large variety of PGPRs produce polyamines, such as putrescine, spermine, spermidine, and cadaverine, and are known to be involved in promoting plant growth and improving abiotic stress tolerance in plants [113]. The genes coding for arginine decarboxylase (SpeA), agmatinase (SpeB), and spermidine synthase (SpeE), which direct polyamines biosynthesis, were also found in the KR2-7 genome (Table 6).