Results SCPCHD adducts stabilize the DNA duplex through a network of CH-π interactions The five known SCPCHD natural products can be divided into three sub-types based on the number and arrangement of the indole and pyrroloindole subunits (Fig. 1a). To better understand how these differences affect toxicity and repair, we selected one compound from eac`h group for biochemical and biophysical characterization (Fig. 2). We previously demonstrated that a single YTM adduct in a short oligonucleotide retains a B-DNA conformation and dramatically increases the stability of the duplex, providing an explanation for why these lesions are poorly repaired by the NER pathway18,46. Similarly, earlier work showed that multiple CC-1065 adducts greatly increase the melting temperature of genomic DNA19. To directly compare the effects of the different SCPCHD sub-types on DNA stability and structure, we introduced a single YTM, DSA, or CC-1065 adduct onto a central adenine within the same GC-rich DNA dodecamer. The circular dichroism spectra of each construct showed negative and positive bands at ~240 and 270 nm, respectively, indicative of B-form DNA47 (Fig. 2a). Additional features in the spectra likely result from either minor structural perturbation of the DNA or dichroism of the SCPCHD adducts themselves, which produce broad peaks above 300 nm in the absorbance spectra (Fig. 2b). To assess the effect of each compound on duplex stability, thermal denaturation was monitored by an increase in absorbance at 260 nm (Fig. 2c). Relative to unmodified DNA, the presence of a single DSA, YTM, or CC-1065 adduct increased the melting temperature by 23, 36, or ≥41 °C, respectively. The increase in duplex stability correlated with the stability of the adduct. After 28 days at 30 °C, only 16%, 11%, and 8%, respectively, of DSA, YTM, and CC-1065 adducts had spontaneously depurinated (Fig. 2d and Supplementary Fig. 1). For comparison, the half-life of 3-methyl-2′-deoxyadenosine in genomic DNA is <4 days under similar conditions (interpolated from previously published rates at 22 °C and 39 °C)48.Fig. 2Characterization of DNA adducts produced by YTM, DSA, and CC-1065.a, b Circular dichroism (a) and absorbance (b) spectra of unmodified and alkylated DNA collected at 15 °C. c Thermal melting profiles of unmodified and alkylated DNA. Melting temperatures (Tm,DNA = 49 °C, Tm,DSA-DNA = 72 °C, Tm,YTM-DNA = 85 °C, and Tm,CC1065-DNA ≥ 90 °C) were determined by fitting the data to a polynomial function and calculating the inflexion point of the curve. Spectra and melting profiles for unmodified DNA and YTM-DNA were previously described by Mullins et al.18. d Spontaneous depurination of alkylated DNA at 30 °C. The data were fit to a linear model and half-lives (t1/2,DSA-DNA = 142 ± 11 days, t1/2,YTM-DNA = 224 ± 56 days, and t1/2,CC1065-DNA = 288 ± 36 days) were calculated assuming first-order kinetics. Data are presented as the mean ± SD from three replicate experiments. e Hypothetical models of DNA modified by YTM, DSA, and CC-1065. The dashed boxes indicate nucleotides that are predicted to form CH-π interactions with the SCPCHD adducts. f Correlation between melting temperature, rate of spontaneous depurination (plotted as nucleotide half-life), and number of nucleotides forming CH-π interactions, derived from c, d, and e, respectively. Horizontal error bars represent uncertainty in the melting temperature of CC1065-DNA caused by the lack of an endpoint in the melting profile. As such, the estimated melting temperature of CC1065-DNA was plotted as the average value ± the range of values calculated assuming endpoints between those of unmodified DNA (minimum) and DSA-DNA (maximum). Nucleotide half-lives are presented as the mean ± SD from three replicate experiments. Source data for a–d and f are provided as a Source Data file. Fig. 2Characterization of DNA adducts produced by YTM, DSA, and CC-1065.a, b Circular dichroism (a) and absorbance (b) spectra of unmodified and alkylated DNA collected at 15 °C. c Thermal melting profiles of unmodified and alkylated DNA. Melting temperatures (Tm,DNA = 49 °C, Tm,DSA-DNA = 72 °C, Tm,YTM-DNA = 85 °C, and Tm,CC1065-DNA ≥ 90 °C) were determined by fitting the data to a polynomial function and calculating the inflexion point of the curve. Spectra and melting profiles for unmodified DNA and YTM-DNA were previously described by Mullins et al.18. d Spontaneous depurination of alkylated DNA at 30 °C. The data were fit to a linear model and half-lives (t1/2,DSA-DNA = 142 ± 11 days, t1/2,YTM-DNA = 224 ± 56 days, and t1/2,CC1065-DNA = 288 ± 36 days) were calculated assuming first-order kinetics. Data are presented as the mean ± SD from three replicate experiments. e Hypothetical models of DNA modified by YTM, DSA, and CC-1065. The dashed boxes indicate nucleotides that are predicted to form CH-π interactions with the SCPCHD adducts. f Correlation between melting temperature, rate of spontaneous depurination (plotted as nucleotide half-life), and number of nucleotides forming CH-π interactions, derived from c, d, and e, respectively. Horizontal error bars represent uncertainty in the melting temperature of CC1065-DNA caused by the lack of an endpoint in the melting profile. As such, the estimated melting temperature of CC1065-DNA was plotted as the average value ± the range of values calculated assuming endpoints between those of unmodified DNA (minimum) and DSA-DNA (maximum). Nucleotide half-lives are presented as the mean ± SD from three replicate experiments. Source data for a–d and f are provided as a Source Data file. Characterization of DNA adducts produced by YTM, DSA, and CC-1065. a, b Circular dichroism (a) and absorbance (b) spectra of unmodified and alkylated DNA collected at 15 °C. c Thermal melting profiles of unmodified and alkylated DNA. Melting temperatures (Tm,DNA = 49 °C, Tm,DSA-DNA = 72 °C, Tm,YTM-DNA = 85 °C, and Tm,CC1065-DNA ≥ 90 °C) were determined by fitting the data to a polynomial function and calculating the inflexion point of the curve. Spectra and melting profiles for unmodified DNA and YTM-DNA were previously described by Mullins et al.18. d Spontaneous depurination of alkylated DNA at 30 °C. The data were fit to a linear model and half-lives (t1/2,DSA-DNA = 142 ± 11 days, t1/2,YTM-DNA = 224 ± 56 days, and t1/2,CC1065-DNA = 288 ± 36 days) were calculated assuming first-order kinetics. Data are presented as the mean ± SD from three replicate experiments. e Hypothetical models of DNA modified by YTM, DSA, and CC-1065. The dashed boxes indicate nucleotides that are predicted to form CH-π interactions with the SCPCHD adducts. f Correlation between melting temperature, rate of spontaneous depurination (plotted as nucleotide half-life), and number of nucleotides forming CH-π interactions, derived from c, d, and e, respectively. Horizontal error bars represent uncertainty in the melting temperature of CC1065-DNA caused by the lack of an endpoint in the melting profile. As such, the estimated melting temperature of CC1065-DNA was plotted as the average value ± the range of values calculated assuming endpoints between those of unmodified DNA (minimum) and DSA-DNA (maximum). Nucleotide half-lives are presented as the mean ± SD from three replicate experiments. Source data for a–d and f are provided as a Source Data file. To elucidate the structural and chemical origins of these trends, we modeled each of the constructs by manually docking ideal B-form DNA and SCPCHD adducts taken from crystallographic AlkD product complexes (described below) (Fig. 2e). Despite being maintained as rigid bodies, all adducts fit in the minor groove without steric clashes. In these hypothetical models, the hydrophilic edges of the subunits are exposed to solvent, whereas the hydrophobic faces are sandwiched between the backbones of the two DNA strands. As we previously described with YTM adducts18, this arrangement creates an extended network of CH-π interactions. Although these interactions are individually often weak (~1 kcal/mol)49, the combined strength of many such interactions generates a strong energy barrier to duplex denaturation and lesion depurination. Indeed, DNA stability and lesion half-life correlate with the number of nucleotides that form CH-π interactions (Fig. 2f). Thus, this network of weak interactions explains the trends in duplex stability and nucleotide half-life that we observe with each adduct. Importantly, our models and conclusions are consistent with a previously published NMR structure of DSA-DNA (PDB accession 1DSA)50. (Supplementary Fig. 2), which further highlights the importance of CH-π interactions on the stability of SCPCHD-modified DNA duplexes. Relative to ideal B-form DNA, the DSA adduct in the experimental structure induces a slight narrowing of the minor groove and twisting of the DNA backbone, which maximizes the number and strength of the CH-π interactions formed between the adduct and the DNA. Thus, through a network of CH-π interactions, SCPCHD adducts create an induced fit in the minor groove that tethers the opposing DNA strands and prevents gross deformation to the B-DNA conformation, explaining how these adducts pose a significant challenge to repair by the UvrABC NER excinuclease18. YtkR2 and C10R5 evolved to provide self-resistance against YTM and CC-1065 Historically, bulky DNA lesions, such as SCPCHD adducts, have been regarded as substrates for the NER pathway51–54. However, we previously showed that NER provides Bacillus anthracis with only limited resistance against YTM, while AlkD-mediated BER provides a modest degree of additional resistance18. At the time, we speculated the AlkD homologs that evolved in antibiotic-producing bacteria would provide greater resistance against their SCPCHD natural products. To test this theory, we transformed Escherichia coli with either an empty plasmid or a plasmid encoding AlkD, YtkR2, or C10R5, and incubated the cultures with various concentrations of YTM, DSA, or CC-1065 (Supplementary Fig. 3). Sensitivity to the compounds was scored as the lag time, or delay prior to exponential cell growth55,56 (Fig. 3). In the absence of any drug, cell growth was unchanged regardless of the protein being expressed. Conversely, cells transformed with only an empty vector showed different degrees of resistance against the three SCPCHD compounds. As previously observed with eukaryotic cells13, YTM was the most toxic, inhibiting growth at the lowest drug concentration, followed by CC-1065 and then DSA. In cultures containing YTM, only YtkR2 provided clear and significant resistance, shortening the lag phase before exponential growth. Similarly, in cultures containing CC-1065, C10R5 provided the greatest resistance, although YtkR2, and to a much lesser extent AlkD, also provided additional resistance. The same trend was observed in cultures containing DSA; C10R5 provided the greatest resistance, followed by YtkR2 and then AlkD. These data are consistent with the notion that YtkR2 and C10R5 evolved to provide self-resistance against YTM and CC-1065, respectively. However, both proteins also confer substantial resistance against DSA, and YtkR2 provides moderate resistance against CC-1065. This lack of specificity suggests that the features of YtkR2 and C10R5 responsible for drug resistance are largely independent of the differences between the SCPCHD compounds. The only exception to this generalization appears to be the lack of resistance against YTM provided by C10R5.Fig. 3Determination of drug resistance.E. coli BL21(DE3) cells transformed with either an empty plasmid (blank) or a plasmid encoding AlkD, YtkR2, or C10R5 were grown in the presence of various concentrations of YTM, DSA, or CC-1065. A shorter lag phase (lag time) before the onset of exponential growth indicates increased drug resistance. A complete lack of cell growth was plotted as a lag time of 18 h, the total incubation period for the cultures, as indicated by the dashed line. Data are presented as the mean ± SD from four replicate experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Fig. 3Determination of drug resistance.E. coli BL21(DE3) cells transformed with either an empty plasmid (blank) or a plasmid encoding AlkD, YtkR2, or C10R5 were grown in the presence of various concentrations of YTM, DSA, or CC-1065. A shorter lag phase (lag time) before the onset of exponential growth indicates increased drug resistance. A complete lack of cell growth was plotted as a lag time of 18 h, the total incubation period for the cultures, as indicated by the dashed line. Data are presented as the mean ± SD from four replicate experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Determination of drug resistance. E. coli BL21(DE3) cells transformed with either an empty plasmid (blank) or a plasmid encoding AlkD, YtkR2, or C10R5 were grown in the presence of various concentrations of YTM, DSA, or CC-1065. A shorter lag phase (lag time) before the onset of exponential growth indicates increased drug resistance. A complete lack of cell growth was plotted as a lag time of 18 h, the total incubation period for the cultures, as indicated by the dashed line. Data are presented as the mean ± SD from four replicate experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Product affinity inversely correlates with cellular resistance To understand how YtkR2 and C10R5 confer greater resistance than AlkD to SCPCHD natural products, we measured in vitro excision activity using purified proteins and defined oligonucleotide substrates (Fig. 4a,b and Supplementary Fig. 4). Under single-turnover conditions, in which the enzymes are in molar excess of the DNA substrates, both AlkD and YtkR2 rapidly excised all three adducts, approaching the endpoints of the reactions within 15 s (Fig. 4c, Supplementary Fig. 5, and Supplementary Table 1). C10R5 rapidly excised DSA and CC-1065 lesions, albeit more slowly than AlkD and YtkR2, but removed YTM adducts at a substantially reduced rate. Under multiple-turnover conditions, in which the DNA substrates are in molar excess of the enzymes, the results were strikingly different (Fig. 4d, Supplementary Fig. 6, and Supplementary Table 1). Although AlkD rapidly excised a molar equivalent of each adduct (i.e., the first turnover in which ~10% product is formed), subsequent turnovers occurred several orders of magnitude more slowly. Excision of adducts by YtkR2 was similarly slowed, although to a lesser extent. Surprisingly, the multiple-turnover rates of removal of DSA and CC-1065 lesions by C10R5 were effectively unchanged; only the rate of excision of YTM adducts was substantially reduced. Thus, under single-turnover conditions, all homologs have the capacity for rapid excision of diverse SCPCHD lesions, although this capacity appears to be reduced in C10R5, and inefficient substrate recognition by C10R5 seemingly further slows removal of YTM lesions. For all homologs, there is only weak correlation between rates of single-turnover excision and cellular resistance (Figs. 3 and 4c, and Supplementary Table 1). Conversely, the multiple-turnover rates of the three enzymes are strongly correlated with their cellular resistance against each SCPCHD compound (Figs. 3 and 4d, and Supplementary Table 1).Fig. 4Measurement of adduct excision activity.a Sequence specificity of SCPCHD natural products. Modified nucleotides are indicated with arrows. The central 2′-deoxyadenosine nucleotide is modified by DSA with relatively low frequency. b Separation of full-length DNA substrate (25-mer) from alkali-cleaved product (12- or 13-mer) by denaturing gel electrophoresis. Oligonucleotide substrates were incubated with or without (mock) enzyme for 30 s before reactions were quenched with sodium hydroxide and heat to denature both the enzyme and the DNA and to cleave the DNA at the AP site. The high melting temperature of the GC-rich substrate prevented complete denaturation of the DNA duplex, producing a smeared substrate band. The unique sequence specificities of YTM, CC-1065, and DSA for different 2′-deoxyadenosine nucleotides result in generation of alkali-cleaved products of different lengths. The lower specificity of DSA allows for modification of one of two nucleotides, each corresponding to a different product band. Experiments were performed in triplicate. c Single-turnover excision of SCPCHD adducts. Reactions contained 1 μM enzyme and 100 nM DNA. With all substrates, both AlkD and YtkR2 approached the endpoints of the reactions by the first time point, potentially reducing or masking differences in excision rates between the adducts and between the enzymes. d Multiple-turnover excision of SCPCHD adducts. Reactions contained 10 nM enzyme and 100 nM DNA. e Incision of AP-DNA. SCPCHD adducts were pre-incubated with AlkD, YtkR2, or C10R5 to generate AP-DNA for subsequent incision by EndoIV. THF-DNA and 3mAde nucleobase were also pre-incubated with each homolog or without enzyme (mock). Incomplete excision of YTM-Ade by C10R5 during the pre-incubation reaction reduced the amount of AP-DNA (Supplementary Fig. 7), limiting the possible fraction product. The affected quantity is indicated with an asterisk. Of the AP-DNA produced, 98% was subsequently incised by EndoIV. Data in c–e are presented as the mean ± SD from three replicate experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Fig. 4Measurement of adduct excision activity.a Sequence specificity of SCPCHD natural products. Modified nucleotides are indicated with arrows. The central 2′-deoxyadenosine nucleotide is modified by DSA with relatively low frequency. b Separation of full-length DNA substrate (25-mer) from alkali-cleaved product (12- or 13-mer) by denaturing gel electrophoresis. Oligonucleotide substrates were incubated with or without (mock) enzyme for 30 s before reactions were quenched with sodium hydroxide and heat to denature both the enzyme and the DNA and to cleave the DNA at the AP site. The high melting temperature of the GC-rich substrate prevented complete denaturation of the DNA duplex, producing a smeared substrate band. The unique sequence specificities of YTM, CC-1065, and DSA for different 2′-deoxyadenosine nucleotides result in generation of alkali-cleaved products of different lengths. The lower specificity of DSA allows for modification of one of two nucleotides, each corresponding to a different product band. Experiments were performed in triplicate. c Single-turnover excision of SCPCHD adducts. Reactions contained 1 μM enzyme and 100 nM DNA. With all substrates, both AlkD and YtkR2 approached the endpoints of the reactions by the first time point, potentially reducing or masking differences in excision rates between the adducts and between the enzymes. d Multiple-turnover excision of SCPCHD adducts. Reactions contained 10 nM enzyme and 100 nM DNA. e Incision of AP-DNA. SCPCHD adducts were pre-incubated with AlkD, YtkR2, or C10R5 to generate AP-DNA for subsequent incision by EndoIV. THF-DNA and 3mAde nucleobase were also pre-incubated with each homolog or without enzyme (mock). Incomplete excision of YTM-Ade by C10R5 during the pre-incubation reaction reduced the amount of AP-DNA (Supplementary Fig. 7), limiting the possible fraction product. The affected quantity is indicated with an asterisk. Of the AP-DNA produced, 98% was subsequently incised by EndoIV. Data in c–e are presented as the mean ± SD from three replicate experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Measurement of adduct excision activity. a Sequence specificity of SCPCHD natural products. Modified nucleotides are indicated with arrows. The central 2′-deoxyadenosine nucleotide is modified by DSA with relatively low frequency. b Separation of full-length DNA substrate (25-mer) from alkali-cleaved product (12- or 13-mer) by denaturing gel electrophoresis. Oligonucleotide substrates were incubated with or without (mock) enzyme for 30 s before reactions were quenched with sodium hydroxide and heat to denature both the enzyme and the DNA and to cleave the DNA at the AP site. The high melting temperature of the GC-rich substrate prevented complete denaturation of the DNA duplex, producing a smeared substrate band. The unique sequence specificities of YTM, CC-1065, and DSA for different 2′-deoxyadenosine nucleotides result in generation of alkali-cleaved products of different lengths. The lower specificity of DSA allows for modification of one of two nucleotides, each corresponding to a different product band. Experiments were performed in triplicate. c Single-turnover excision of SCPCHD adducts. Reactions contained 1 μM enzyme and 100 nM DNA. With all substrates, both AlkD and YtkR2 approached the endpoints of the reactions by the first time point, potentially reducing or masking differences in excision rates between the adducts and between the enzymes. d Multiple-turnover excision of SCPCHD adducts. Reactions contained 10 nM enzyme and 100 nM DNA. e Incision of AP-DNA. SCPCHD adducts were pre-incubated with AlkD, YtkR2, or C10R5 to generate AP-DNA for subsequent incision by EndoIV. THF-DNA and 3mAde nucleobase were also pre-incubated with each homolog or without enzyme (mock). Incomplete excision of YTM-Ade by C10R5 during the pre-incubation reaction reduced the amount of AP-DNA (Supplementary Fig. 7), limiting the possible fraction product. The affected quantity is indicated with an asterisk. Of the AP-DNA produced, 98% was subsequently incised by EndoIV. Data in c–e are presented as the mean ± SD from three replicate experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. We previously demonstrated that slow multiple turnover by AlkD was correlated with inhibition of AP endonuclease activity in vitro, which we attributed to tight binding of the AP product generated upon base excision18,57. The substantially faster multiple turnover that we observed with YtkR2 and C10R5 therefore suggests that product affinity is weaker for these homologs. To test this possibility, we performed AP-DNA incision assays using the AP endonuclease EndoIV and either AP-DNA generated from each of the SCPCHD adducts or tetrahydrofuran (THF)-DNA containing an AP analog (Fig. 4e and Supplementary Fig. 7). Reaction mixtures with THF-DNA were supplemented with free 3-methyladenine (3mAde) nucleobase to approximate the nucleobase adducts excised from the SCPCHD lesions, while also providing a basis to assess the effects of the excised SCPCHD adducts on product affinity. Relative to AP-DNA produced by AlkD, AP-DNA generated by YtkR2 or C10R5 was incised by EndoIV to a substantially greater extent, regardless of which SCPCHD adduct was excised to produce the abasic site, consistent with relatively weak product binding by YtkR2 and C10R5. For each of the homologs, AP-DNA generated from DSA-DNA was cleaved to the greatest extent, which could be explained by DSA-Ade being bound by each of the homologs with weaker affinity, producing a less stable ternary product complex, and/or by DSA-Ade inhibiting AP-DNA incision by EndoIV to a lesser degree. The former would be consistent with the fewer observed or predicted protein-adduct binding interactions formed with DSA-Ade (described below), whereas the latter would be consistent with the fewer predicted CH-π interactions formed with DSA (Fig. 2e, f). Unlike AP-DNA, the extent to which THF-DNA was incised by EndoIV was independent of which DNA glycosylase homolog was present, and no additional THF-DNA was incised in reactions mixtures in which AlkD, YtkR2, and C10R5 were omitted (Fig. 4e and Supplementary Fig. 7), indicating product affinity is greater for abasic DNA in the presence of the excised SCPCHD adducts. Taken together, the base excision and AP-DNA incision data suggest that YtkR2 and C10R5 evolved to possess lower product affinities than AlkD for abasic DNA derived from SCPCHD lesions. Moreover, this apparently reduced product affinity correlates with the increased cellular resistance provided by these specialized homologs (Figs. 3 and 4d,e). Diverse SCPCHD adducts are recognized primarily through nonspecific interactions To understand AlkD’s lack of specificity for the three SCPCHD sub-types and comparatively high product affinity, we determined crystal structures of AlkD bound to DNA containing each of the three adducts. We previously reported the structure of AlkD bound to AP-DNA and YTM-Ade (PDB accession 5UUG)18 and now report structures of AlkD bound to AP-DNA and either DSA-Ade or CC1065-Ade (Fig. 5 and Supplementary Table 2). Product complexes were generated by incubating AlkD with the corresponding DNA substrates, allowing for enzymatic hydrolysis of the N-glycosidic bond and formation of an AP site and a free nucleobase adduct (Fig. 5a). The conformations of AlkD and the abasic DNA are effectively identical in the three structures (Fig. 5b and Supplementary Fig. 8). Relative to the substrate models (Fig. 2e), binding by AlkD bends the B-DNA helix by ~30° and widens the minor groove by 4–5 Å, disrupting the CH-π interactions between the adducts and the modified strand, and enabling the three catalytic residues—Trp109, Asp113, and Trp187—to contact the modified nucleotide18,43,58. Despite this remodeling, the excised nucleobases remain stacked in the DNA duplex, with the bulky SCPCHD adducts bound within an extended cleft between the concave surface of the protein and the minor groove of the DNA.Fig. 5Comparison of AlkD product complexes.a Excised SCPCHD adducts from the crystallographic AlkD product complexes. Annealed omit mFo − DFc electron density maps are contoured to 3σ and carved around the omitted atoms with a 2 Å radius. b Orthogonal views of AlkD in complex with AP-DNA and either YTM-Ade (magenta), DSA-Ade (cyan), or CC1065-Ade (green). c Close-up views of the AlkD product complexes showing all residues that interact with the SCPCHD adducts. Hydrogen-bonding interactions are indicated with dashed lines. The structure of AlkD bound to AP-DNA and YTM-Ade (PDB accession 5UUG) was previously described by Mullins et al.18. Fig. 5Comparison of AlkD product complexes.a Excised SCPCHD adducts from the crystallographic AlkD product complexes. Annealed omit mFo − DFc electron density maps are contoured to 3σ and carved around the omitted atoms with a 2 Å radius. b Orthogonal views of AlkD in complex with AP-DNA and either YTM-Ade (magenta), DSA-Ade (cyan), or CC1065-Ade (green). c Close-up views of the AlkD product complexes showing all residues that interact with the SCPCHD adducts. Hydrogen-bonding interactions are indicated with dashed lines. The structure of AlkD bound to AP-DNA and YTM-Ade (PDB accession 5UUG) was previously described by Mullins et al.18. Comparison of AlkD product complexes. a Excised SCPCHD adducts from the crystallographic AlkD product complexes. Annealed omit mFo − DFc electron density maps are contoured to 3σ and carved around the omitted atoms with a 2 Å radius. b Orthogonal views of AlkD in complex with AP-DNA and either YTM-Ade (magenta), DSA-Ade (cyan), or CC1065-Ade (green). c Close-up views of the AlkD product complexes showing all residues that interact with the SCPCHD adducts. Hydrogen-bonding interactions are indicated with dashed lines. The structure of AlkD bound to AP-DNA and YTM-Ade (PDB accession 5UUG) was previously described by Mullins et al.18. Within the SCPCHD binding cleft, 14 protein residues contact one or more of the adducts (Fig. 5c). Only three—Gln38, Lys156, and Lys194—form adduct-specific hydrogen-bonding interactions. Gln38 interacts with the hydroxyl and methoxy substituents of the S−1 subunit unique to YTM, while Lys194 interacts with the methoxy substituent of the S+2 subunit unique to CC-1065. Otherwise, Gln38 and Lys194 function as DNA-binding residues. Lys156 contacts all three adducts but only forms a hydrogen-bonding interaction with the hydroxyl substituent specific to the S+1 subunit of CC-1065. In YTM and DSA, this position is occupied by a methoxy group, forcing Lys156 to adopt a different rotamer that hydrogen bonds with the DNA backbone. All other hydrogen bonds between the adducts and the protein are mediated by water. Additional recognition of the adducts occurs through hydrophobic contacts and CH-π interactions. The majority of these binding interactions involve the S0 and S+1 subunits present in all of the SCPCHD adducts. Of seemingly principal importance are Tyr27, Met28, Trp109, Asp110, Leu155, and Trp187. Together, these residues form a shelf below the adducts and provide an alternative network of CH-π interactions, replacing the network of CH-π interactions that is disrupted upon binding of the DNA by AlkD and widening of the minor groove. Thus, AlkD’s substrate-binding cleft can accommodate each SCPCHD compound with strikingly few adduct-specific interactions. This lack of specificity is consistent with AlkD’s similar rates of excision for the three substrates. To explain the structural basis for cellular resistance against SCPCHD compounds provided by YtkR2 and C10R5, the AlkD product complexes were used as templates to create homology models of both homologs bound to abasic DNA and each of the nucleobase adducts (Supplementary Fig. 9). Despite the low sequence identity (19–25%) among the three proteins, the only putative structural difference of note is an extended loop between helices αI and αJ in both YtkR2 and C10R5. The three homologs appear to share the same three catalytic residues and a high conservation among DNA-binding residues, although YtkR2 and C10R5 possess fewer apparent DNA-binding residues (15 and 14, respectively) than the 18 present in AlkD. Within the substrate-binding cleft, the largest variation predicted by the homology models is in the residues that contact the SCPCHD adducts. However, despite this variation, YtkR2 and C10R5 seemingly form few specific interactions with any of the adducts, including the adduct that each evolved to excise. The only putative hydrogen-bonding interactions between YtkR2 and YTM are formed between Arg42 and the hydroxyl and methoxy substituents of the S−1 subunit. Similarly, the only likely hydrogen-bonding interactions between C10R5 and CC-1065 are formed between Lys159, Arg205, and the hydroxyl and methoxy substituents of the S+1 and S+2 subunits. Surprisingly, all of the adduct-binding residues in YtkR2 and C10R5 that appear to be specific for YTM and CC-1065 are equivalent to the three DNA-binding residues in AlkD that form similar interactions with YTM-Ade and CC1065-Ade (Fig. 5c and Supplementary Fig. 9). As with AlkD, the remainder of the binding interactions are composed of water-mediated hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic contacts, and CH-π interactions. This apparent lack of structural specificity, combined with the nearly complete lack of specificity observed in the excision assays, suggests the enhanced cellular resistance provided by YtkR2 and C10R5 does not result from enhanced recognition of a particular SCPCHD adduct. Instead, the additional cellular resistance provided by YtkR2 and C10R5 seems more likely to result from decreased product affinity, which may be explained, at least in part, by the reduced number of predicted DNA-binding residues in these homologs (Supplementary Fig. 9). It is also possible that other, more subtle, structural factors that are not apparent from the homology models may play a role. C10R5 poorly accommodates the unique arrangement of subunits in YTM The only significant indication of substrate specificity by any of the three homologs was C10R5’s relatively slow excision of YTM-Ade adducts in vitro and corresponding lack of YTM resistance in cells. Given the structural differences between the SCPCHD natural products, we postulated that unfavorable interactions between C10R5 and the S−1 subunit unique to YTM were likely responsible for this reduced activity. Comparison of the YtkR2 and C10R5 homology models indicated three residues (Phe22, Ser25, and Ala40) in C10R5 that were likely to contact the S−1 subunit and that were not conserved in either YtkR2 or AlkD (Fig. 6a–c and Supplementary Fig. 9). To determine the influence of these residues on substrate specificity, we mutated them to the corresponding residues in YtkR2 and measured YTM-Ade excision under modified single- and multiple-turnover conditions (Fig. 6d,e, Supplementary Figs. 10 and 11, and Supplementary Table 3). Under single-turnover conditions, both the F22T and S25G single mutants exhibited a modest increase in YTM-Ade excision activity relative to wild-type C10R5. This effect was further enhanced in the F22T-S25G double mutant. Moreover, the increased activity of the C10R5 F22T-S25G double mutant toward YTM-Ade was within five-fold of wild-type C10R5’s activity toward CC1065-Ade (Supplementary Tables 1 and 3). In contrast, an A40R single mutant and an F22T-S25G-A40R triple mutant displayed decreased YTM-Ade excision activity relative to the wild-type enzyme and the F22T-S25G double mutant, respectively. Under multiple-turnover conditions, all C10R5 single mutants, including A40R, exhibited increased YTM-Ade excision activity, which was further increased in the F22T-S25G double mutant. As observed under single-turnover conditions, the F22T-S25G-A40R triple mutant displayed reduced YTM-Ade excision activity relative to the double mutant. Despite this reduction, the YTM-Ade excision activity of the triple mutant was comparable to that of YtkR2 under multiple-turnover conditions, whereas the YTM-Ade excision activities of the F22T single mutant and the F22T-S25G double mutant were slightly greater than that of YtkR2 (Supplementary Tables 1 and 3). These comparatively rapid multiple-turnover rates, however, are likely more indicative of C10R5’s apparently low product affinity than vastly improved YTM recognition, as the rates at which these mutants removed YTM-Ade is more than 11-fold slower than the rates at which wild-type C10R5 removed CC1065-Ade and DSA-Ade. Moreover, under single-turnover conditions, the YTM-Ade excision activity of YtkR2 vastly exceeded that of all C10R5 mutants. Thus, although the substitutions (F22T and S25G) that increased the volume of the adduct-binding cleft also increased the rate of YTM-Ade excision, suggesting that C10R5’s low activity for YTM-Ade is dictated by a sterically constrained binding cleft at the position of the S−1 subunit, additional unfavorable interactions may also be hindering recognition of YTM lesions (Supplementary Figs. 8 and 9), preventing more rapid excision of YTM-Ade adducts.Fig. 6Molecular basis of C10R5 substrate specificity.a, b Close-up views of YtkR2 (a) and C10R5 (b) homology models bound to AP-DNA and YTM-Ade. Hydrogen-bonding interactions are indicated with dashed lines. c Truncated sequence alignment of AlkD, YtkR2, and C10R5. Residues that interact with AP-DNA and YTM-Ade in the AlkD product complex (PDB accession 5UUG) are indicated with orange triangles and magenta circles, respectively. d Single-turnover excision of YTM-Ade by wild-type and mutant C10R5. Reactions contained 1 μM enzyme and 100 nM DNA. e Multiple-turnover excision of YTM-Ade by wild-type and mutant C10R5. Reactions contained 10 nM enzyme and 100 nM DNA. Mutated residues are indicated with bold font in a and b and with black circles in c. Data in d and e are presented as the mean ± SD from three replicate experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. f YTM resistance conferred by C10R5 mutants. E. coli BL21(DE3) cells were transformed with either an empty plasmid (blank) or a plasmid encoding YtkR2, C10R5, or one of two C10R5 mutants, and grown in the absence or presence of YTM. Experiments were performed in duplicate. Fig. 6Molecular basis of C10R5 substrate specificity.a, b Close-up views of YtkR2 (a) and C10R5 (b) homology models bound to AP-DNA and YTM-Ade. Hydrogen-bonding interactions are indicated with dashed lines. c Truncated sequence alignment of AlkD, YtkR2, and C10R5. Residues that interact with AP-DNA and YTM-Ade in the AlkD product complex (PDB accession 5UUG) are indicated with orange triangles and magenta circles, respectively. d Single-turnover excision of YTM-Ade by wild-type and mutant C10R5. Reactions contained 1 μM enzyme and 100 nM DNA. e Multiple-turnover excision of YTM-Ade by wild-type and mutant C10R5. Reactions contained 10 nM enzyme and 100 nM DNA. Mutated residues are indicated with bold font in a and b and with black circles in c. Data in d and e are presented as the mean ± SD from three replicate experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. f YTM resistance conferred by C10R5 mutants. E. coli BL21(DE3) cells were transformed with either an empty plasmid (blank) or a plasmid encoding YtkR2, C10R5, or one of two C10R5 mutants, and grown in the absence or presence of YTM. Experiments were performed in duplicate. Molecular basis of C10R5 substrate specificity. a, b Close-up views of YtkR2 (a) and C10R5 (b) homology models bound to AP-DNA and YTM-Ade. Hydrogen-bonding interactions are indicated with dashed lines. c Truncated sequence alignment of AlkD, YtkR2, and C10R5. Residues that interact with AP-DNA and YTM-Ade in the AlkD product complex (PDB accession 5UUG) are indicated with orange triangles and magenta circles, respectively. d Single-turnover excision of YTM-Ade by wild-type and mutant C10R5. Reactions contained 1 μM enzyme and 100 nM DNA. e Multiple-turnover excision of YTM-Ade by wild-type and mutant C10R5. Reactions contained 10 nM enzyme and 100 nM DNA. Mutated residues are indicated with bold font in a and b and with black circles in c. Data in d and e are presented as the mean ± SD from three replicate experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. f YTM resistance conferred by C10R5 mutants. E. coli BL21(DE3) cells were transformed with either an empty plasmid (blank) or a plasmid encoding YtkR2, C10R5, or one of two C10R5 mutants, and grown in the absence or presence of YTM. Experiments were performed in duplicate. To determine the biological relevance of the gain-of-activity mutations, we transformed E. coli with either an empty plasmid or a plasmid encoding YtkR2, C10R5, C10R5 F22T S25G, or C10R5 F22T S25G A40R, and incubated cells on solid medium containing various concentrations of YTM (Fig. 6f and Supplementary Fig. 12). In the absence of YTM, cell growth was unaffected by the protein construct being expressed. In the presence of YTM, YtkR2 provided the greatest resistance, whereas cells containing an empty plasmid were the most sensitive. As in our growth experiments in liquid medium (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 3), wild-type C10R5 provided little to no resistance to YTM (Fig. 6f and Supplementary Fig. 12). The C10R5 double mutant, however, provided clear resistance, albeit less than YtkR2. Consistent with our YTM-Ade excision assays (Fig. 6d, e), the C10R5 triple mutant provided less resistance than the double mutant, and only arguably provided more resistance than wild-type C10R5 (Fig. 6f and Supplementary Fig. 12). These relatively modest increases in YTM resistance may be limited by a number of factors, including potentially reduced expression and/or solubility of the mutant proteins. Regardless, these cellular results validate our structural and biochemical conclusions, showing homology-based mutations that likely only eliminate steric clashes between C10R5 and YTM—without introducing specific adduct-binding interactions—are able to increase the YTM resistance conferred by C10R5.