RESULTS LmrC antibiotic resistance protein is dispensable for resistance. To interpret the role of the three resistance proteins encoded in the lincomycin BGC, we first evaluated the contribution of the individual proteins to the resistance. Specifically, we knocked out lmrA, lmrB, and lmrC singly or in pairs in the lincomycin-producing S. lincolnensis wild-type (WT) strain (Fig. 1b) and, in addition, we complemented the genes under the control of a constitutive or natural promoter acting in trans (see Fig. S1). Furthermore, we constitutively expressed the genes in a lincosamide-sensitive Streptomyces coelicolor M1154 strain (26) (Fig. 1c). Then, we evaluated the resistance phenotype of the WT, knockout, and complemented strains by determining the MICs of lincomycin and its derivative, clindamycin. We revealed that all strains bearing lmrA, including the strains with lmrA only (Fig. 1b, S. lincolnensis strains WT, ΔC, ΔB, and ΔBC; Fig. 1c, S. coelicolor strains ACC and AC), were highly or extremely resistant to lincomycin, while the resistance to lincomycin significantly decreased when lmrA was absent regardless of other two resistance genes were present. Interestingly, the resistance to clindamycin, generally a more efficient semisynthetic derivative of lincomycin, is different in this respect. Specifically, the majority of the tested strains were moderately resistant to clindamycin with no or little contribution of LmrA to the resistance (Fig. 1b, compares the strains differing in lmrA only: ΔB versus ΔAB, WT versus ΔA, and ΔC versus ΔAC, and Fig. 1c, AC versus M1154+pIJ10257). Therefore, we assume that LmrA, a transporter of the major facilitator family, is highly specific to lincomycin but not clindamycin, and it ensures sufficient self-resistance to the produced lincomycin on its own. In contrast to the LmrA transporter, the LmrB 23S rRNA monomethyltransferase confers high resistance to lincomycin and clindamycin when overexpressed in S. coelicolor (Fig. 1c, BCC and BC). However, when naturally expressed in S. lincolnensis, it confers a significant level of resistance to clindamycin alone (Fig. 1b, compares strains differing only in lmrB: WT versus ΔB, ΔC versus ΔBC, and ΔA versus ΔAB). The last resistance protein, LmrC, confers moderate resistance to both lincomycin and clindamycin when overexpressed in S. coelicolor (Fig. 1c, strain CC). However, its contribution to the overall resistance in S. lincolnensis is not considerable relative to either LmrB (Fig. 1b, compares strains ΔA versus ΔAC) or LmrA (Fig. 1b, compares strains ΔB versus ΔBC). The ΔC knockout strain without lmrC showed a slightly increased lincosamide resistance compared to that of the WT (Fig. 1b). It is worth noting that the complementation of the knockout strains under the control of the putative natural promoter restored the resistance phenotype of the WT except for lmrB (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). In this case, complementation had to be performed under the control of a constitutive promoter because lmrB is cotranscribed with three upstream genes, as evidenced below. Interestingly, constitutive lmrB expression resulted in higher resistance values than those of lmrB expression in its original genomic context (see Fig. S1). Furthermore, the resistance of S. lincolnensis WT and knockout strains was determined from spore suspension, which does necessarily reflect the resistance of the mycelium during lincomycin production. Therefore, we determined the MICs of S. lincolnensis deletion strains using spores and mycelia from two different time points of the seed or production cultures (see Fig. S1). Overall, the data for mycelia comply with the data obtained for spores and show that resistance of the mycelium during production increased compared to the mycelium from the seed culture. Apart from investigating the resistance phenotypes, we determined the amount of lincomycin produced by S. lincolnensis WT and single-knockout strains in the culture broth (Fig. 1b). The results support our conclusions drawn from the resistance of the strains. Specifically, the strains with high or extreme resistance to lincomycin were able to produce considerable levels of lincomycin, i.e., the strains bearing both lmrA and lmrB (which had the largest amount of lincomycin produced) and the strain bearing lmrA and not lmrB (which had up to 50% of the largest amount of lincomycin produced). On the other hand, strains without lmrA, which were the least resistant to lincomycin, produced only traces of lincomycin or nothing. The dispensability of LmrC for the overall resistance documented above complies with the comparable lincomycin production of ΔC versus WT strains. In addition, the production of lincomycin significantly fluctuated (Fig. 1b). This observation could be explained by a more complex regulation-resistance system (LmbU, LmrA, LmrB, and LmrC) encoded within the lincomycin BGC compared to the highly similar BGC of another lincosamide, celesticetin (12), which contains only one nonbiosynthetic gene, the ccr1, coding for Ccr1 23S rRNA monomethyltransferase, as a self-protecting resistance protein homologous to LmrB (Fig. 1a) (for a review, see reference 27). Indeed, the fluctuation of celesticetin produced by S. caelestis in parallel cultures is not as pronounced as that of the lincomycin produced by S. lincolnensis. Moreover, S. caelestis never failed to produce celesticetin (Fig. 1d), while S. lincolnensis failed to produce lincomycin in several parallel WT cultures (Fig. 1b). Expression of lmrA, lmrB, lmrC, and lmbU is induced by clindamycin. Given our hypothesis of the complex regulation-resistance system of lincomycin production, we wondered whether the expression of any of the lmbU, lmrA, lmrB, and lmrC genes could be affected by the produced antibiotic. Therefore, we cultured S. lincolnensis WT and divided the culture before the onset of lincomycin biosynthesis into two parallel cultures, one of which was supplemented with clindamycin at a subinhibitory concentration (Fig. 2a). At several time points, we semiquantitatively monitored the expression of the respective genes by reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR). Supplementation with clindamycin allowed us to distinguish between the lincosamide used to study its effect on the gene expression and the lincosamide produced by the strain, which we determined by ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography. FIG 2Clindamycin induces the expression of all lincomycin BGC-encoded resistance genes as well as lmbU encoding a transcriptional regulator and accelerates lincomycin production. (a) Representative results of RT-PCR and lincomycin LC-MS analyses (n = 6) show earlier transcription of lmrA, lmrB, lmrC, and lmbU genes and accelerated lincomycin production in S. lincolnensis WT after clindamycin supplementation at the eighth hour of culture (0.5 mg liter−1). The results of all six independent cultivations are available in Fig. S2. The rpoD gene encoding the RNA polymerase sigma factor was used as an internal control. PCR amplification after 25 cycles is shown if not stated otherwise. (b) A summary of lincomycin production levels at 44 and 164 h in six independent cultivations (see Fig. S2) shows that the addition of clindamycin activates lincomycin biosynthesis in the seed culture and increases the total lincomycin levels in the production culture. LLOQ is a lower limit of quantitation (0.031 mg liter−1). (c and d) Results of RT-PCR mapping show that lmrB is transcribed within the lmbUXY-lmrB operon (c) and that lmrC is transcribed independently on lmbU (d). Representative results of three biological replicates are shown. RT-PCR mapping results for the lmrC transcript 3′ end are available in Fig. S3a. Clindamycin induces the expression of all lincomycin BGC-encoded resistance genes as well as lmbU encoding a transcriptional regulator and accelerates lincomycin production. (a) Representative results of RT-PCR and lincomycin LC-MS analyses (n = 6) show earlier transcription of lmrA, lmrB, lmrC, and lmbU genes and accelerated lincomycin production in S. lincolnensis WT after clindamycin supplementation at the eighth hour of culture (0.5 mg liter−1). The results of all six independent cultivations are available in Fig. S2. The rpoD gene encoding the RNA polymerase sigma factor was used as an internal control. PCR amplification after 25 cycles is shown if not stated otherwise. (b) A summary of lincomycin production levels at 44 and 164 h in six independent cultivations (see Fig. S2) shows that the addition of clindamycin activates lincomycin biosynthesis in the seed culture and increases the total lincomycin levels in the production culture. LLOQ is a lower limit of quantitation (0.031 mg liter−1). (c and d) Results of RT-PCR mapping show that lmrB is transcribed within the lmbUXY-lmrB operon (c) and that lmrC is transcribed independently on lmbU (d). Representative results of three biological replicates are shown. RT-PCR mapping results for the lmrC transcript 3′ end are available in Fig. S3a. Transcriptional analysis of lmrABC and lmbU and lincomycin production in response to clindamycin. RT-PCR and lincomycin LC-MS analyses of six independent cultures showed earlier transcription of lmrA, lmrB, lmrC, and lmbU genes and accelerated lincomycin production in S. lincolnensis WT after clindamycin supplementation at the eighth hour of culture (0.5 mg liter−1). LLOQ is a lower limit of quantitation (0.031 mg liter−1). Download FIG S2, TIF file, 3.0 MB. RT-PCR analysis of the lmrC-lmbU intergenic region shows that lmrC is transcribed independently of lmbUXY-lmrB operon. (a) RT-PCR mapping of the lmrC 3′ end transcript showed the presence of a transcription terminator immediately downstream of the lmrC STOP codon. (b) RT-PCR mapping of the lmbU start showed that in lmrC knockout (ΔC), lmbU is cotranscribed with the apramycin resistance gene. RT-PCR analyses were performed for total RNA isolated from WT and ΔC cultures induced or uninduced by clindamycin (0.5 mg liter−1; Fig. S6C). Download FIG S3, TIF file, 0.3 MB. The results in Fig. 2a show that supplementation with clindamycin induced the expression of all the studied genes—lmbU, lmrB, lmrA, and lmrC—in the earlier stages of growth (9 to 16 h) compared to that of the untreated cultures (44 to 104 h), while no effect of clindamycin was observed on the rpoD control. In agreement with this observation, the onset of lincomycin production also shifted toward an earlier time of cultivation (44 h) in the cultures supplemented with clindamycin and reached higher values at the end of production culture (Fig. 2b; see also Fig. S2). The transcription of lmrA was induced more readily and was detectable over a longer period, while the relative amount of lmrC, lmbU, and lmrB transcripts decreased over time. Similar profiles of lmrC, lmbU, and lmrB transcripts indicate that these genes might be in the same operon. Amplification of lmbU from the 1st DNA strand synthesized using a primer specific to lmrB demonstrated that the expression of lmrB is directly coupled with that of lmbU and the two biosynthetic genes lmbX and lmbY (Fig. 2c). On the other hand, an analogous mapping of the start of lmbU transcript (Fig. 2d) and the end of lmrC transcript (see Fig. S3a) showed that the lmrC gene is transcribed independently of the lmbUXY-lmrB operon. LmrC is essential for the antibiotic-induced onset of lincomycin production. Given the newly defined function of ABCF proteins as modulators of ribosomal PTC, the onset of lincomycin production in response to antibiotics might be regulated by LmrC. To uncover the role of LmrC, we performed comparative mass spectrometry proteomic analysis of the mycelia of S. lincolnensis WT, WT+Cc, and ΔC strains grown in the absence or presence of clindamycin. As shown in Fig. 3a, clindamycin supplementation increased the abundance of lincomycin BGC proteins in both the WT (namely, proteins of the lmbUXYB operon) and WT+Cc (the whole BGC), while in the ΔC strain, lincomycin BGC proteins were more abundant in cultures without clindamycin. The induction by clindamycin was also observable at the lincomycin production level at 40 h in the WT+Cc strain but not in the ΔC knockout strain, where higher production levels were independent of clindamycin treatment (Fig. 3a). No lincomycin was detected in clindamycin supplemented WT cultures, which contradicts the experiment in Fig. 2a, where high levels of lincomycin were detected at the end of seed culture supplemented with clindamycin. Slight differences in cultivation conditions might be responsible for the shifted onset of lincomycin production between the two experiments (see Fig. S7b). Nevertheless, these results suggest that LmrC is required for the onset of lincomycin biosynthesis triggered by clindamycin. To confirm that LmrC is essential for the transduction of antibiotic signal to the expression of lincomycin BGC, we quantified the transcripts of lmrC, lmbU, and lmbN genes in S. lincolnensis WT and ΔC cultured with or without clindamycin at a time point before lincomycin BGC expression. As shown in Fig. 3b, the clindamycin induced transcription of lmrC, lmbU, and lmbN, which was not under the direct control of lmbU, in the WT strain but not in the lmrC-deficient ΔC knockout strain. Notably, the observed low-level constitutive transcription of lmbU in the ΔC strain can be explained by the insertion of apramycin cassette (see Fig. S3b), causing a polar effect. This phenomenon explains the increased production of proteins in ΔC (Fig. 3a). However, it is important for our reasoning that neither protein production nor lmbU transcription in the ΔC strain is affected by clindamycin. ABCF family proteins generally exhibit ATPase activity, which is required for protein function (22). Therefore, we wondered whether LmrC is a functional protein capable of ATPase activity that induces gene expression. Hence, we complemented the ΔC knockout strain with lmrC or lmrCEQ12 expressed from a theophylline-inducible plasmid (Ci). The overproduction of functional LmrC resulted in the expression of lmbU and lmbN, while the overproduction of ATPase-deficient LmrCEQ12 mutant did not have this effect (Fig. 3c). Notably, the expression of lmbU and lmbN mediated by the overproduction of LmrC was achieved without supplementation with clindamycin, and a similar phenomenon was observed at the protein level when LmrC was produced constitutively in the WT (the comparison of WT and WT+CC without clindamycin treatment is shown in Fig. 3a). Altogether, these results demonstrate that clindamycin induces the production of LmrC, which in turn induces the production of LmbU, which is a known activator of lincomycin biosynthesis (24). FIG 3Only ATPase-active LmrC is required for the induction of lmbU transcription by clindamycin. (a) Proteomic analysis showing the effect of LmrC and clindamycin on lincomycin biosynthesis and ABCF protein abundance. Ten independent cultures of each S. lincolnensis WT, WT constitutively expressing lmrC (WT+Cc), and lmrC knockout (ΔC) strain were cultured for 40 h in seed medium with or without clindamycin (CLI) and for another 120 h in production medium without clindamycin. Lincomycin production was quantified after 40 h and at the end of production culture (160 h). Values of lincomycin production are independently expressed as a percentage of maximum production at each time point. Statistical analysis of the proteomic data is shown in Fig. S4a and Table S1. A comparison of WT growth with or without clindamycin supplementation is available in Fig. S4b. Resistance genes (in red) are indicated by the prefix “r.” The orientation of genes in lincomycin BGC are indicated by “less-than” (<) and “more-than” (>) signs. (b and c) Results of the qRT-PCR analysis (n = 4) of the WT and ΔC from the 16-h seed culture show that LmrC is required to activate lmbU and lmbN transcription in response to clindamycin (b) and that only ATPase-active LmrC can activate lmbU and lmbN transcription (c). The production of LmrC and its ATPase-deficient mutant LmrCEQ12 in ΔC were inducible by theophylline (ΔC+Ci and ΔC+CEQ12i, respectively). The data are expressed relative to the WT cultured with clindamycin; the error bars indicate standard deviation, and the asterisks represent the level of significance (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01). The evidence that LmrCEQ12 does not affect growth is shown in Fig. S4c. (d) Western blot showing the induction of lmbU expression by clindamycin-induced LmrC in the heterologous host S. coelicolor M145 with the respective plasmids. U-mCherry (U-mCh) levels in 16-h seed culture mycelium uninduced or induced by clindamycin (0.03 mg liter−1) were detected by mCherry-specific antibody in S. coelicolor M145 carrying plasmids C-U-mCh, U-mCh, and UC-mCh. A representative Western blot is shown. The graph below shows the average values of relative protein abundancy (RPA) in three independent experiments. Only ATPase-active LmrC is required for the induction of lmbU transcription by clindamycin. (a) Proteomic analysis showing the effect of LmrC and clindamycin on lincomycin biosynthesis and ABCF protein abundance. Ten independent cultures of each S. lincolnensis WT, WT constitutively expressing lmrC (WT+Cc), and lmrC knockout (ΔC) strain were cultured for 40 h in seed medium with or without clindamycin (CLI) and for another 120 h in production medium without clindamycin. Lincomycin production was quantified after 40 h and at the end of production culture (160 h). Values of lincomycin production are independently expressed as a percentage of maximum production at each time point. Statistical analysis of the proteomic data is shown in Fig. S4a and Table S1. A comparison of WT growth with or without clindamycin supplementation is available in Fig. S4b. Resistance genes (in red) are indicated by the prefix “r.” The orientation of genes in lincomycin BGC are indicated by “less-than” (<) and “more-than” (>) signs. (b and c) Results of the qRT-PCR analysis (n = 4) of the WT and ΔC from the 16-h seed culture show that LmrC is required to activate lmbU and lmbN transcription in response to clindamycin (b) and that only ATPase-active LmrC can activate lmbU and lmbN transcription (c). The production of LmrC and its ATPase-deficient mutant LmrCEQ12 in ΔC were inducible by theophylline (ΔC+Ci and ΔC+CEQ12i, respectively). The data are expressed relative to the WT cultured with clindamycin; the error bars indicate standard deviation, and the asterisks represent the level of significance (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01). The evidence that LmrCEQ12 does not affect growth is shown in Fig. S4c. (d) Western blot showing the induction of lmbU expression by clindamycin-induced LmrC in the heterologous host S. coelicolor M145 with the respective plasmids. U-mCherry (U-mCh) levels in 16-h seed culture mycelium uninduced or induced by clindamycin (0.03 mg liter−1) were detected by mCherry-specific antibody in S. coelicolor M145 carrying plasmids C-U-mCh, U-mCh, and UC-mCh. A representative Western blot is shown. The graph below shows the average values of relative protein abundancy (RPA) in three independent experiments. Streptomycete cultivation, antibiotic treatment, and sample collection. (a) MICs determined from spores. (b) S. lincolnensis growth for lincomycin production, LIN BGC gene expression, and proteomic analysis. Arrows indicating time of antibiotic supplementation and culture sampling are colored depending on the subsequent analysis: LC-MS lincomycin production in blue, RT-PCR expression analysis in red, nLC-MS2 proteomic analysis in green, and Western blot analyses in black. (c) S. coelicolor growth for Western blot analysis of the lmrC attenuator. Download FIG S7, TIF file, 0.9 MB. Growth and proteomic analysis of S. lincolnensis lmrC knockout (ΔC) and overexpression (WT+Cc) strains. (a) Volcano plots showing the distribution of protein abundance fold change and P values (two-tailed t test, false discovery rate [FDR] of 0.05, with a fudge factor S0 = 0.1) for each strain induced by clindamycin and for the WT+Cc and ΔC compared to the WT. (b) Growth of S. lincolnensis WT and ΔC is affected by the presence of a subinhibitory concentration of clindamycin (0.5 mg liter−1), while WT+Cc is not. (c) The growth of ΔC is affected by the production of the partial ATPase active mutant LmrC E495Q (CEQ2i) but not by the ATPase-deficient double mutant LmrC E167Q E495Q (CEQ12i). Genes encoding LmrC and its mutants are expressed from the ermEp promoter combined with the theophylline-dependent riboswitch (subscript “i”). Fivefold dilutions of spore suspension starting at OD450 0.2 were spotted onto agar without or with 3 mM theophylline and LIN (1 mg liter−1). Plates were incubated at 30°C for 5 days. Download FIG S4, TIF file, 1.6 MB. Biosynthetic gene clusters and representative actinomycete genomes used as a source for the phylogenetic tree of ABCF proteins in Fig. 6b. Download Table S1, PDF file, 1.1 MB. The antibiotic-LmrC-LmbU signaling cascade is independent of other S. lincolnensis regulatory elements. Several recent studies described regulators of lincomycin biosynthesis encoded outside the BGC in the S. lincolnensis genome (28–31). Some of these conserved global regulators might be involved in the antibiotic-induced onset of lincomycin production in addition to LmrC. To rule out this hypothesis, we cloned the lincomycin BGC region starting upstream of lmrC and ending with lmbU translationally fused with the mCherry reporter (C-U-mCh) and introduced it into S. coelicolor M145. Truncated versions of the construct without the 5′-half lmrC (U-mCh) and lmbU-mCherry expressed from the constitutive ermEp promoter (UC-mCh) were used as controls (Fig. 3d). As expected, the induced production of the mCherry reporter in response to clindamycin was detected only in the strain with the full-length C-U-mCh construct, while in the strain with the truncated lmrC gene (U-mCh), the level of mCherry expression did not change after clindamycin induction. From these data, we concluded that lmbU expression, and thus the onset of lincomycin production in response to antibiotics, is mainly triggered by lmrC. However, we cannot completely exclude the possibility that S. coelicolor homologs of global regulators that contribute to lincomycin biosynthesis in S. lincolnensis, such as AdpA and BldD (32, 33), also affect the expression of lmrC and lmbU in S. coelicolor. LmrC production is induced by the LSAP group of antibiotics and dampened by LmrA and LmrB. We have shown that the LmrC-induced transcription of lmbU is largely dependent on how LmrC production is regulated in response to antibiotics. To gain more insight into the regulation of LmrC production, we first tested whether the inducing antibiotics were limited only to clindamycin. For this purpose, we treated S. lincolnensis WT cells with a range of ribosome-targeting antibiotics and a cell wall-targeting carbenicillin, and we detected LmrC protein levels using an LmrC-specific antibody. In addition to clindamycin, only lincomycin (lincosamide group), pristinamycin IIA (streptogramin A group), and tiamulin (pleuromutilin group), with lower efficiency, induced LmrC production (Fig. 4a). Interestingly, the activity of these lincosamide-streptogramin A-pleuromutilin (LSAP) antibiotics with overlapping binding sites on the ribosome (Fig. 4a) is compromised by antibiotic resistance ABCF proteins as exemplified by Vga(A)LC in staphylococci (18, 34, 35). This suggests that the regulation of LmrC production is coupled to its resistance function, which is the dislocation of the antibiotic from its specific overlapping binding sites within the PTC. Next, we investigated whether the lincomycin BGC-encoded resistance proteins LmrA and LmrB can affect the whole cascade by dampening lmrC expression. First, we evaluated LmrC protein levels in S. lincolnensis ΔB+B with constitutive overproduction of the LmrB methyltransferase. As shown in Fig. 4b, LmrC production no longer responded to lincomycin and clindamycin, which do not bind to ribosomes methylated by LmrB, but instead remained responsive to the treatment with pristinamycin IIA (streptogramin A group), which can bind to methylated ribosomes (36). Since the lmrB gene is in the lmbUXY-lmrB operon encoding biosynthetic enzymes (Fig. 2c and d), LmrB is an ideal candidate to provide a feedback loop of the cascade. Indeed, pronounced induction of lincomycin production was apparent in strain ΔB compared to the WT, whereas in the ΔB+B strain, constitutive lmrB expression dampened the onset of lincomycin biosynthesis (Fig. 4c). FIG 4LmrC production and lincomycin biosynthesis are induced by LSAP antibiotics and dampened by LmrA and LmrB. Western blot analysis of LmrC production in 16-h seed culture mycelium uninduced or induced by antibiotics. Protein production was detected using an LmrC-specific antibody (see Fig. S5a and b). (a) LmrC levels in the WT after the addition of antibiotics (LIN, lincomycin; CLI, clindamycin; PIIA, pristinamycin IIA; TIA, tiamulin; ERY, erythromycin; PIA, pristinamycin IA; CHL, chloramphenicol; CAR, carbenicillin). A schematic illustration of the overlapping binding sites of the antibiotic groups (represented by colored symbols) defined by resistance phenotypes conferred by antibiotic resistance ABCF proteins (LSAP, lincosamides, streptogramins A, pleuromutilins; MSB, macrolides, streptogramin B; PhO, phenicol, and oxazolidinones) is shown. (b) LmrC production is not induced by lincomycin and clindamycin in ΔB+BC with constitutive lmrB expression because lincosamides cannot bind to the ribosomes methylated by LmrB. In contrast, pristinamycin IIA, which can bind to methylated ribosomes, retained the ability to induce LmrC production. (c) Lincomycin produced in the media of the WT (n = 6), lmrB knockout (ΔB, n = 2), and ΔB+BC (n = 3) strains after 42 h of seed culture with or without clindamycin supplementation (see Fig. S7b). (d) LmrC production in response to lincomycin was higher in the lmrA-null mutant (ΔA) lacking a specific lincomycin exporter than in the WT. In panels a, b, and d, representative Western blots are shown, and the graphs below show the average values of relative protein abundancy (RPA) in three independent experiments. LmrC production and lincomycin biosynthesis are induced by LSAP antibiotics and dampened by LmrA and LmrB. Western blot analysis of LmrC production in 16-h seed culture mycelium uninduced or induced by antibiotics. Protein production was detected using an LmrC-specific antibody (see Fig. S5a and b). (a) LmrC levels in the WT after the addition of antibiotics (LIN, lincomycin; CLI, clindamycin; PIIA, pristinamycin IIA; TIA, tiamulin; ERY, erythromycin; PIA, pristinamycin IA; CHL, chloramphenicol; CAR, carbenicillin). A schematic illustration of the overlapping binding sites of the antibiotic groups (represented by colored symbols) defined by resistance phenotypes conferred by antibiotic resistance ABCF proteins (LSAP, lincosamides, streptogramins A, pleuromutilins; MSB, macrolides, streptogramin B; PhO, phenicol, and oxazolidinones) is shown. (b) LmrC production is not induced by lincomycin and clindamycin in ΔB+BC with constitutive lmrB expression because lincosamides cannot bind to the ribosomes methylated by LmrB. In contrast, pristinamycin IIA, which can bind to methylated ribosomes, retained the ability to induce LmrC production. (c) Lincomycin produced in the media of the WT (n = 6), lmrB knockout (ΔB, n = 2), and ΔB+BC (n = 3) strains after 42 h of seed culture with or without clindamycin supplementation (see Fig. S7b). (d) LmrC production in response to lincomycin was higher in the lmrA-null mutant (ΔA) lacking a specific lincomycin exporter than in the WT. In panels a, b, and d, representative Western blots are shown, and the graphs below show the average values of relative protein abundancy (RPA) in three independent experiments. Western blot analysis of LmrC levels in S. lincolnensis ATCC 25466 and S. coelicolor M1154. (a) Specificity of the LmrC-polyclonal antibody was validated using 16-h seed culture mycelium of S. lincolnensis WT and lmrC knockout (ΔC) strains grown in the absence or presence of lincomycin (LIN, 4 mg liter−1) or clindamycin (CLI, 0.5 mg liter−1). (b) Scheme of the constructs used for lmrC expression and comparison of LmrC production levels detected by LmrC antibody. The lmrC gene was either expressed from its natural promoter (marked with subscript “n”) or under the constitutive ermEp promoter (expression from Hygr vector pIJ10257 marked with subscript “c,” expression from Aprr vector pIJ6902 marked with subscript “c2”). (c) Representative Western blots and analysis of three repetitions showing S. lincolnensis WT LmrC protein levels at time points after supplementation with LIN (4 mg liter−1) and CLI (4 mg liter−1). (d) Clindamycin-inducible production of the LmrC-mCherry reporter in S. lincolnensis WT and S. coelicolor M145 strains and the effect of the active or inactive ATPase-deficient mutant lmrCEQ12 on induction. Download FIG S5, TIF file, 1.3 MB. Next, we evaluated the effect of LmrA on LmrC protein levels. Since LmrA confers high-level resistance only to lincomycin (Fig. 1b; see also Fig. S1), there was a considerably higher level of LmrC in the WT induced by clindamycin than in the WT induced by lincomycin (Fig. 4a and b), which may reflect the fact that only lincomycin is exported by the LmrA transporter; thus, the low intracellular levels are maintained (37). Indeed, deletion of lmrA (ΔA) resulted in comparable levels of LmrC expression induced by either lincomycin or clindamycin (Fig. 4d). LmrA thus specifically dampens the LmrC production induced by lincomycin by reducing its intracellular concentration. Since both LmrB and LmrA reduce lmrC expression in response to antibiotics, we propose that alongside their resistance function, they also serve as a negative feedback loop to the antibiotic-LmrC-LmbU signaling cascade of lincomycin biosynthesis. LmrC production is regulated by ribosome-mediated transcriptional attenuation. Substantially reduced production of LmrC in the lmrB-overexpression strain (Fig. 4b) after antibiotic induction showed that the binding of the antibiotic to the ribosome is a prerequisite for the induction of LmrC production. LmrC could thus be regulated by a ribosome-mediated attenuation mechanism as described previously for other antibiotic-resistant ABCF proteins (38–40): in the absence of antibiotics, either the formation of a premature terminator in the 5′ untranslated region (5′UTR) or the inaccessibility of ribosome binding site (RBS) prevent gene expression. In the presence of antibiotics, inhibited ribosomes stall during translation of the upstream regulatory open reading frame (uORF), which promotes the alteration of the 5′UTR secondary structure and thereby releases gene expression (41). Indeed, an in silico analysis of the lmrC upstream region revealed two putative promoters and two premature terminators with the ability to form alternative antiterminator conformations and several short uORFs (Fig. 5a). To examine whether the attenuation mechanism is involved in the control of lmrC expression, we first used RT-PCR to map from which of the two predicted promoters lmrC is transcribed and the position of the premature terminator (Fig. 5a). The analysis of RNA from the 16-h time point, where lmrC is induced by clindamycin, and from the 104-h time point, where lmrC transcription starts naturally without clindamycin supplementation (Fig. 2a), showed that in both cases, the lmrC transcript starts from promoter P1 (Fig. 5b). As shown in Fig. 5c, the position of the premature terminator was mapped to the region between primers RT 4 and 5, which corresponds to the position of the predicted terminator 1 (Fig. 5a). Next, we prepared a reporter system in which the lmrC upstream region, including its promoter, and full-length lmrC were translationally fused to mCherry (C-mCh). We introduced the construct into S. lincolnensis WT and S. coelicolor M145 strains and determined mCherry levels with or without clindamycin (see Fig. S5d). The mCherry-specific signal was detected only in the presence of clindamycin in both strains, so further experiments were performed in S. coelicolor M145. A series of G-to-C and C-to-G point mutations (see Fig. S6a) in the terminator hairpin led to the disruption and restoration of clindamycin-induced C-mCh production, confirming the terminator prediction (Fig. 5d). To localize the uORF, we mutated the start codons of four upstream ORFs (ATG to ATC or ATG to AAG; Fig. S6a). Surprisingly, only the disruption of uORF2, which partially overlaps with the terminator, led to strong constitutive expression of C-mCh, whereas mutations in other ORFs did not affect C-mCh production (Fig. 5d). This observation suggests an unusual attenuation mechanism in which uORF2 translation is required to form a terminator structure. In summary, the antibiotic-mediated control of lmrC expression occurs via the formation of a premature terminator structure, which prevents lmrC expression in the absence of an antibiotic. LSAP antibiotics, if bound to PTC, trigger the shift from the terminator to the antiterminator conformation, enabling lmrC transcription (see Fig. S6a). The lmrC transcript, specifically its attenuator, is thus the primary sensor of the antibiotic-LmrC-LmbU signaling cascade for lincomycin biosynthesis. FIG 5LmrC production is regulated by a ribosome-mediated transcriptional attenuation mechanism. (a) An in silico analysis of the lmrC 5′UTR indicates the presence of two promoters predicted by NNPP (74) and G4PromFinder (75) with NNPP probability scores of 0.83 and 0.89 for P1 and P2, respectively, two transcriptional terminators predicted by PASIFIC (Prediction of Alternative Structures for Identification of Cis-regulation) (41) with PASIFIC scores of 0.71 and 0.44 for terminators 1 and 2, respectively, and four putative regulatory uORFs. The RT-PCR mapping strategy used to validate promoter and terminator predictions is shown. (b to d) The results of RT-PCR mapping (n = 3) show that lmrC is transcribed from the P1 promoter both after the addition of clindamycin (16 h, CLI) (b) and at the natural start of lmrC transcription (104 h, –no ATB) (c), lmrC transcript is prematurely terminated in the absence of clindamycin in the region between RT primers 4 and 5, thus validating the terminator 1 prediction. (d) Mutational analysis of the 5′UTR of lmrC validates the proposed ribosome-mediated attenuation mechanism. Western blot analysis of the LmrC-mCherry (C-mCh) reporter with unmutated (WT) or mutated lmrC 5′UTR was performed. Mutations within the predicted terminator disrupted (C»G and G»C) and reconstituted (G»C and C»G) the CLI-inducible production of C-mCh, while the mutagenesis of start codons of the predicted uORFs (ATG»AAG) identified uORF2 to be important for antibiotic-induced lmrC expression. The ensemble diversity of the shown secondary structures indicates the average base-pair distance in each mutated terminator loop. The positions of the individual mutations are depicted in attenuator models (see Fig. S6a). Summary data of the Western blot analysis of independent experiments are shown in Fig. S6b. LmrC production is regulated by a ribosome-mediated transcriptional attenuation mechanism. (a) An in silico analysis of the lmrC 5′UTR indicates the presence of two promoters predicted by NNPP (74) and G4PromFinder (75) with NNPP probability scores of 0.83 and 0.89 for P1 and P2, respectively, two transcriptional terminators predicted by PASIFIC (Prediction of Alternative Structures for Identification of Cis-regulation) (41) with PASIFIC scores of 0.71 and 0.44 for terminators 1 and 2, respectively, and four putative regulatory uORFs. The RT-PCR mapping strategy used to validate promoter and terminator predictions is shown. (b to d) The results of RT-PCR mapping (n = 3) show that lmrC is transcribed from the P1 promoter both after the addition of clindamycin (16 h, CLI) (b) and at the natural start of lmrC transcription (104 h, –no ATB) (c), lmrC transcript is prematurely terminated in the absence of clindamycin in the region between RT primers 4 and 5, thus validating the terminator 1 prediction. (d) Mutational analysis of the 5′UTR of lmrC validates the proposed ribosome-mediated attenuation mechanism. Western blot analysis of the LmrC-mCherry (C-mCh) reporter with unmutated (WT) or mutated lmrC 5′UTR was performed. Mutations within the predicted terminator disrupted (C»G and G»C) and reconstituted (G»C and C»G) the CLI-inducible production of C-mCh, while the mutagenesis of start codons of the predicted uORFs (ATG»AAG) identified uORF2 to be important for antibiotic-induced lmrC expression. The ensemble diversity of the shown secondary structures indicates the average base-pair distance in each mutated terminator loop. The positions of the individual mutations are depicted in attenuator models (see Fig. S6a). Summary data of the Western blot analysis of independent experiments are shown in Fig. S6b. Mutational analysis of lmrC RNA cis-regulatory element. (a) Two mutually exclusive structures of putative attenuator 1 were predicted by the PASIFIC algorithm with a score of 0.71. Key regulatory regions include the anti-terminator in orange, terminator in green/blue, and a short uORF of 16 amino acids (yellow) encoded in a region that encompasses the terminator region. The positions of triple G-to-C and C-to-G mutations that were created to disrupt the terminator stem are marked by red and blue arrows, respectively. The positions of point mutations in start codons of putative uORFs are marked by gray and yellow arrows. Mutations in the terminator stem changed the amino acid sequence of uORF2 as indicated. (b) Summary of Western blot analyses (at least three observations for each strain) shows the effect of mutations depicted in Fig. S6a on the clindamycin inducibility of the LmrC-mCherry reporter (C-mCh). The graph shows the log10 values of the relative protein abundance (RPA) of each mutated strain with or without clindamycin induction. Download FIG S6, TIF file, 1.2 MB. LmrC is coproduced with seven other ABCFs, two of which are responsive to a lincosamide. The LmrC ABCF protein has a regulatory function, which transduces an antibiotic signal to activate lincomycin biosynthesis in S. lincolnensis. Comprehensive phylogenetic analysis classified 30 subfamilies of bacterial ABCF proteins (22). Four subfamilies (Uup, Etta, YdiF, and YbiT) have a broad distribution, while others, including subfamilies with the resistance function (ARE1-7), are taxon specific. Actinobacteria is a phylum with the highest number of ABCFs, including seven subfamilies specific to this taxon (AAF1-6, ARE4-5). In addition to LmrC, which belongs to the ARE5 subfamily, the genome of S. lincolnensis encodes eight ABCF proteins, three of which have putative resistance activity (ARE5 encoded by SLINC_7152 and two AAF4 encoded by SLINC_1109 and SLINC_6197). We speculated whether some of these resistance proteins are induced by clindamycin and thus could have an antibiotic-responsive regulatory function. We used the same mass spectrometry proteomics data set as used for the comparative analysis of lincomycin biosynthetic proteins to analyze the abundance of ABCF proteins in S. lincolnensis WT, WT+Cc, and ΔC strains grown in the absence or presence of clindamycin. As shown in Fig. 3a, all but one ABCF protein was present in all samples, but only two (ARE5 and AAF4) out of three putative antibiotic-resistant ABCF proteins were substantially upregulated by clindamycin or produced lincomycin. The third putative resistance ABCF protein was not detected in any of the samples. Considering that the putative resistance function of these clindamycin-responsive ABCF proteins is redundant, they may have a regulatory function similar to LmrC.