Results and Discussion Identification of the Biosynthetic Gene Cluster of Alaremycin The draft genome sequencing of the alaremycin producer strain, Streptomyces sp. A012304, was performed to identify gene(s) involved in the biosynthesis of alaremycin. Therefore, we obtained 3.93 Gbp and 38.6 million reads, and 36.3 million reads were applied for an assembly. Consequently, we established a draft genome of 9.67 Mbp. The number of contigs was 281, and the average length was 34.4 kbp. The minimum and maximum length of the contigs was 131 bp and 432 kb, respectively. A total of 28,768 open reading frames (ORFs) with a length of 30 a.a. or more were found, of which 10,407 ORFs were positive by basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) analysis. Of these, we selected two ALA synthetic gene homologues as candidates for the biosynthetic gene of alaremycin. We assumed that either one is responsible for ALA synthesis, whereas the other is involved in alaremycin biosynthesis. One showed homology with the prokaryotic hemA genes encoding glutamyl-tRNA reductase within the C5 pathway of ALA biosynthesis. The other exhibited homology with the ALAS genes encoding ALAS within the Shemin pathway. This gene was later named almA. Although most bacteria do not contain ALAS, some Streptomyces species have a homologue enzyme, known as cyclic ALAS (cALAS), which catalyses the cyclization of ALA to produce the C5N unit moiety found in several antibiotics (Petrícek et al. 2006; Zhang et al. 2010; Petříčková et al. 2015; Hanh et al. 2018). Thus, we initially suspected that AlmA is a member of the cALAS family. However, the phylogenetic tree comprised of ALAS, cALAS and AlmA showed that the branch of AlmA is out of the cALAS clade and is closer to the ALAS clade (fig. 2A). This phylogenetic topology suggests that AlmA has a distinct function compared with that of cALAS. Next, we attempted to determine which one was responsible for ALA biosynthesis to exclude the ALA synthetic gene and to identify the alaremycin synthetic gene. Fig. 2.Identification of the biosynthetic gene cluster of alaremycin. (A) Amino acid sequence-based phylogenetic tree, which comprises ALAS, cyclic ALAS (cALAS), AlmA and α-oxoamine synthases. Abbreviations of α-oxoamine synthases and the organism’s genus are shown at the left. The clades of ALAS and cALAS are highlighted in blue and gray, respectively, and AlmA is highlighted in magenta. The tree was constructed by the method based on Bayesian inference. (B) Complementation of the E. coli ΔhemA mutant by hemA and ALAS homologues (almA) of A012304. The plasmid carrying hemA or almA gene was introduced into the ALA auxotrophic E. coli MGHA01. E. coli wild-type strain MG1655 was used as a positive control. (C) Gene alignment of the hemA homologue and its flanking region. The hemB, hemC and hemD genes encode porphobilinogen synthase, porphobilinogen deaminase and uroporphyrinogen III synthase, respectively. (D) Gene alignment of the ALAS homologue and its flanking region. These four genes are named almA (ALAS homologue), almB (N-acetyltransferase), almC (oxidoreductase) and almE (MFS transporter). (E) Production of alaremycin by E. coli JM109 transformed with the plasmid palmABC and palmABCE. Ethyl acetate extracts of the culture supernatants were analysed by HPLC as described in the Materials and Methods section. Identification of the biosynthetic gene cluster of alaremycin. (A) Amino acid sequence-based phylogenetic tree, which comprises ALAS, cyclic ALAS (cALAS), AlmA and α-oxoamine synthases. Abbreviations of α-oxoamine synthases and the organism’s genus are shown at the left. The clades of ALAS and cALAS are highlighted in blue and gray, respectively, and AlmA is highlighted in magenta. The tree was constructed by the method based on Bayesian inference. (B) Complementation of the E. coli ΔhemA mutant by hemA and ALAS homologues (almA) of A012304. The plasmid carrying hemA or almA gene was introduced into the ALA auxotrophic E. coli MGHA01. E. coli wild-type strain MG1655 was used as a positive control. (C) Gene alignment of the hemA homologue and its flanking region. The hemB, hemC and hemD genes encode porphobilinogen synthase, porphobilinogen deaminase and uroporphyrinogen III synthase, respectively. (D) Gene alignment of the ALAS homologue and its flanking region. These four genes are named almA (ALAS homologue), almB (N-acetyltransferase), almC (oxidoreductase) and almE (MFS transporter). (E) Production of alaremycin by E. coli JM109 transformed with the plasmid palmABC and palmABCE. Ethyl acetate extracts of the culture supernatants were analysed by HPLC as described in the Materials and Methods section. We performed a complementation test of the Escherichia coli ΔhemA mutant strain MGHA01, which is deficient in the C5 pathway because of a lack of hemA and shows ALA auxotrophy. As shown in fig. 2B, MGHA01 carrying a plasmid vector did not grow on an L agar plate in the absence of ALA. Under these conditions, a plasmid carrying the hemA homologue of A012304 restored the growth of MGHA01 in the absence of ALA, whereas that carrying almA did not. This result clearly indicates that the hemA homologue is responsible for ALA synthesis in A012304 as with most bacteria. This is also supported by the observation that the A012304 genome contains a hemL gene, which is an essential component of the C5 pathway. Additionally, several genes involved in heme biosynthesis are also found downstream of the hemA homologue, that is, hemB, hemC, and hemD, which encode porphobilinogen synthase, porphobilinogen deaminase and uroporphyrinogen III synthase, respectively (fig. 2C). It was suggested that the ALAS homologue is involved in alaremycin biosynthesis. Notably, three serial genes were found downstream of the ALAS homologue, annotated as N-acetyltransferase, oxidoreductase and major facilitator superfamily (MFS) transporter, respectively (fig. 2D), which may be responsible for alaremycin biosynthesis together with the ALAS homologue. To test this, the gene cluster was introduced into E. coli JM109 and the ability of the cells to produce alaremycin was examined. As shown in fig. 2E, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) followed by MS analysis revealed that the E. coli JM109 strain expressing these four genes produced alaremycin extracellularly. When the MFS transporter homologue was deleted, extracellular levels of alaremycin decreased, suggesting that it functions as an alaremycin exporter and may contribute to self-resistance. Conversely, E. coli strains expressing almA encoding the ALAS homologue and its downstream gene encoding N-acetyltransferase or almA did not produce alaremyicn. Based on these results, we concluded that almA and the two genes encoding N-acetyltransferase and oxidoreductase are required for alaremycin biosynthesis. The last gene encoding the MFS transporter is required for alaremycin extrusion. Accordingly, these four genes were designated almA, almB, almC, and almE (fig. 2D). Enzymatic Reaction Catalysed by AlmA In the biosynthetic pathway of alaremycin, it is expected that the AlmA catalyses the condensation of succinyl-CoA and amino acid. Considering the structural similarity between ALA and alaremycin, amino acids having one-carbon side chain may serve as a substrate, such as alanine or serine. To confirm the enzyme reaction catalysed by AlmA, we conducted an in vitro enzyme assay using purified AlmA protein. AlmA was fused with a His-tag on its N-terminus, and the His-tagged AlmA protein was purified. Next, its enzymatic activity was measured using glycine, alanine, serine and threonine as a substrate (fig. 3AandB). Therefore, the AlmA efficiently catalysed the condensation of serine and succinyl-CoA. Conversely, AlmA showed no detectable activity for alanine or threonine (supplementary fig. S1, Supplementary Material online). The Km value for serine is 6.8 ± 1.4 mM, which is comparable to that of Rhodopseudomonas palustris ALAS for glycine (2.31 ± 0.12 mM) (Tan et al. 2019) and Mus musculus ALAS for glycine (8 ± 0.7 mM) (Stojanovski et al. 2016). This indicates that AlmA adopts serine as a substrate. Moreover, the kcat value of AlmA for serine and succinyl-CoA condensation is 2.7 ± 0.1 s−1, which is almost the same as that of the Rp. palustris ALAS for glycine and succinyl-CoA condensation (2.74 ± 0.28 s−1) (Tan et al. 2019). Meanwhile, the kcat value of AlmA for serine and succinyl-CoA condensation is 10-fold higher than that of M. musculus ALAS for glycine (0.25 ± 0.004 s−1) (Stojanovski et al. 2016). These kinetic parameters clearly indicate that AlmA catalyses the condensation of serine and succinyl-CoA to synthesize 5-amino-6-hydroxy-4-oxohexanoic acid, which is the intermediate I of alaremycin (fig. 3C). Considering the catalytic reaction of AlmA and the annotated function of AlmB and AlmC, we have proposed a biosynthetic pathway and efflux mechanism for alaremycin (shown in supplementary fig. S2, Supplementary Material online). Fig. 3.Enzymatic activity of AlmA. (A) Time course analysis and kinetic parameters of His-tagged AlmA. The activity against serine was measured at 0.01 μM His-AlmA and against glycine at 0.01 μM and 2 μM His-AlmA. Solid lines show the slope of the time course reaction for glycine calculated using the least squares method. (B) Kinetic parameters of AlmA as determined by the Michaelis–Menten equation. (C) Catalytic reactions of ALAS and that of the ALAS homologue enzyme AlmA (see also supplementary fig. S2). (D) Effect of glycine on complementation of MGHA01 by the palmA plasmid. Cells grown in L medium were washed with saline and spotted after dilution on an M9 agar plate (top) or M9 agar plate supplemented with 1-mM glycine (bottom). Enzymatic activity of AlmA. (A) Time course analysis and kinetic parameters of His-tagged AlmA. The activity against serine was measured at 0.01 μM His-AlmA and against glycine at 0.01 μM and 2 μM His-AlmA. Solid lines show the slope of the time course reaction for glycine calculated using the least squares method. (B) Kinetic parameters of AlmA as determined by the Michaelis–Menten equation. (C) Catalytic reactions of ALAS and that of the ALAS homologue enzyme AlmA (see also supplementary fig. S2). (D) Effect of glycine on complementation of MGHA01 by the palmA plasmid. Cells grown in L medium were washed with saline and spotted after dilution on an M9 agar plate (top) or M9 agar plate supplemented with 1-mM glycine (bottom). We also examined the activity of AlmA for glycine, which is a substrate of ALAS. Unexpectedly, AlmA also exhibited a slight but significant activity for glycine at higher enzyme concentrations (2 μM). The Km and kcat values for glycine were 2.5 ± 0.4 × 102 mM and 3.9 ± 0.3 × 10−2 s−1, respectively, which is 37-fold higher and 69-fold lower than that for serine. These results suggest that AlmA can synthesize ALA, albeit with lower efficiency. This is supported by the complementation test for the ALA auxotrophic MGHA01. A plasmid carrying the almA gene slightly restored the growth of MGHA01 on the M9 minimal agar plate in the absence of ALA and it was greatly improved by supplementation with 1 mM glycine (fig. 3D), indicating that AlmA indeed synthesizes ALA in vivo using glycine as a substrate. Site-directed Mutagenesis on AlmA towards ALAS The fact that AlmA exhibits ALA synthesis activity led us to the idea that ALAS may have evolved from an AlmA-like protein. As described in the Introduction, it is likely that the Shemin pathway emerged in an ancestral species of α-proteobacteria after the C5 pathway had already been distributed throughout the bacterial domain. We inferred that the AlmA-like antibiotic-synthesizing enzyme, which produces ALA as a by-product, developed into a robust ALA synthetic enzyme and was adopted as a novel ALA synthetic pathway within the ancestral species of α-proteobacteria. To estimate the evolutionary relationship of AlmA and ALAS, we first compared the amino acid sequences of AlmA and several ALAS from α-proteobacteria, yeast and human, focussing on the amino acid residues composing the substrate binding pocket (fig. 4A; supplementary fig. S3, Supplementary Material online). We found that the 82nd residue of AlmA is Ser, but the corresponding residue is conserved as Thr among all ALAS. This residue corresponds to the 83rd Thr of R. sphaeroides ALAS, which is responsible for the amino acid substrate selectivity (Shoolingin-Jordan et al. 2003). Furthermore, the S83T replacement in cALAS of S. nodosus subsp. asukaensis reportedly resulted in the loss of its ability to produce a C5N unit containing antibiotic asukamycin, suggesting that the 83rd residue is responsible for its enzymatic activity (Rui et al. 2010). The 3D structure of R. capsulatus ALAS (RcALAS: Protein Data Bank [PDB] number 2BWP) and that of AlmA constructed by 3D homology modeling show that these amino acid residues are close to the substrate amino acid, glycine. Distances between the substrate and the amino acid residues (4.9 Å in AlmA and 3.6 Å in RcALAS) suggest that the space of the substrate binding pocket of AlmA is larger than that of ALAS (fig. 4B). This may explain why AlmA prefers the bulkier substrate serine over glycine. Additionally, we focused on the 86th Gly of AlmA wherein the corresponding residues among ALAS are conserved as bulkier Ser or Ala. This residue is located in a glycine-rich loop, which is important for succinyl-CoA binding (Astner et al. 2005). Based on these findings, we suspected that the 82nd Ser and 86th Gly of AlmA are responsible for substrate specificity and are related to the divergence of AlmA and ALAS. To confirm the effect of these two residues on substrate specificity, we constructed five AlmA variants by introducing site-specific substitutions: S82T, G86A, G86S, S82T/G86A and S82T/G86S. We examined their ability to synthesize ALA in vivo. Fig. 4.Effects of site-specific mutations at the 82nd and 86th amino acid residues in AlmA on the complementation ability of MGHA01. (A) Sequence alignment of AlmA and ALAS from various species. The genus abbreviations are St: Streptomyces, Rb: Rhodobacter, Rp: Rhodopseudomonas, Sa: Saccharomyces and H: Homo. The residues corresponding to 82nd and 86th of AlmA are highlighted in green. Asterisks represent conserved residues. (B) Comparison of active sites between ALAS from Rb. capsulatus (PDB ID: 2BWP) and AlmA. 3D structure of AlmA was predicted by SWISS-MODEL using ALAS from Rb. capsulatus as a template. The shortest distance between the 82nd residue and the substrate glycine is shown by arrows. (C) Complementation of MGHA01 by AlmA variants. Cells grown in L medium were washed with saline and spotted after dilution on an M9 agar plate. (D) Specific activities of His-AlmA and its variants. Specific activity of His-AlmA against serine was measured using 0.01 μM enzyme and the others with 2 μM. Effects of site-specific mutations at the 82nd and 86th amino acid residues in AlmA on the complementation ability of MGHA01. (A) Sequence alignment of AlmA and ALAS from various species. The genus abbreviations are St: Streptomyces, Rb: Rhodobacter, Rp: Rhodopseudomonas, Sa: Saccharomyces and H: Homo. The residues corresponding to 82nd and 86th of AlmA are highlighted in green. Asterisks represent conserved residues. (B) Comparison of active sites between ALAS from Rb. capsulatus (PDB ID: 2BWP) and AlmA. 3D structure of AlmA was predicted by SWISS-MODEL using ALAS from Rb. capsulatus as a template. The shortest distance between the 82nd residue and the substrate glycine is shown by arrows. (C) Complementation of MGHA01 by AlmA variants. Cells grown in L medium were washed with saline and spotted after dilution on an M9 agar plate. (D) Specific activities of His-AlmA and its variants. Specific activity of His-AlmA against serine was measured using 0.01 μM enzyme and the others with 2 μM. We performed the complementation test for the E. coli ΔhemA mutant MGHA01 to simply evaluate the ALA synthetic activity of these AlmA variants. As shown in fig. 4C, the almA-S82T, almA-G86S, almA-S82T/G86A and almA-S82T/G86S genes restored the growth of MGHA01 more effectively than the original almA gene on an M9 minimal agar plate in the absence of ALA. Especially, growth recovery was markedly improved for the almA-S82T/G86S gene. These results suggest that S82T/G86S simultaneous substitution is the most responsive to the change in substrate specificity of AlmA. Next, we performed an in vitro enzyme assay with AlmA-S82T and AlmA-S82T/G86S. As shown in fig. 4D, AlmA-S82T exhibited a markedly decreased specific activity for serine compared with the original AlmA, which was only 0.3% of the original AlmA activity. Unexpectedly, the specific activity for glycine did not increase but slightly decreased to 31% of that of the original AlmA.In the case of the double substituent AlmA-S82T/G86S, the activity for serine was similar to the single substituent, AlmA-S82T, but the activity of glycine increased compared with AlmA-S82T to a level comparable to the original AlmA. The results of the in vitro enzyme assay indicate that the single substitution of S82T caused a drastic decrease in activity for serine but only a marginal decrease for glycine. Consequently, AlmA-S82T lost most of its synthetic activity for the intermediate I but still retained weak ALA synthetic activity. The additional G86S substitution increased the affinity for glycine, while maintaining low affinity for serine. Consequently, AlmA-S82T/G86S produced ALA more efficiently than AlmA-S82T. The behaviour in complementation tests may be explained by these in vitro results. The antibacterial activity of 5-amino-6-hydroxy-4-oxohexanoic acid (intermediate I) was reported by Perlman et al. (1981). The improvement of growth recovery by almA-S82T resulted from the reduction of toxic intermediate I production though ALA production was also marginally reduced. Additional G86S substitution improved growth by producing more ALA. This is the reason why AlmA-S82T exhibited improved growth recovery compared with AlmA and why AlmA-S82T/G86S showed better growth recovery than AlmA-S82T. In conclusion, we revealed that the 82nd and 86th residues of AlmA are determinants of whether it produces intermediate I or ALA. The fact that only two mutations transform the function of AlmA towards ALAS suggests that AlmA could have evolved into ALA synthase. ASR of AlmA and ALAS Using a BLAST search, we found that AlmA homologues are distributed among several species or strains of Streptomyces, Bacillus and γ-Proteobacteria. They usually utilize the C5 pathway to synthesize ALA. We found that 82nd and 86th residues were highly conserved as Ser and Gly, respectively, among AlmA homologues (supplementary fig. S4, Supplementary Material online). Thus, these AlmA homologues may produce the alaremycin intermediate I or other ALA analogues in a manner similar to AlmA. These AlmA homologues enabled us to perform an ASR analysis. ASR is a phylogenetic analysis to estimate the extinct ancestral sequences (Jermann et al. 1995; Thornton 2004). ASR has been successfully applied to reveal the evolutionary trajectory of a protein of interest (Voordeckers et al. 2012; Risso et al. 2013; Blanquart et al. 2021). To estimate the evolutionary trajectory of AlmA and ALAS, we performed an ASR analysis. The phylogenetic tree was constructed from 65 amino acid sequences: 31 of AlmA homologues and 31 of ALAS from α-Proteobacteria (supplementary Table S1, Supplementary Material online). We used only α-proteobacterial ALAS for ASR because α-Proteobacteria are the most primitive taxa among the organisms utilizing the Shemin pathway and their ALAS are probably closer to the common ancestor of AlmA/ALAS. Three cALAS sequences were used as an out-group (supplementary Table S1, Supplementary Material online). Each sequence was collected from broad orders of organisms: AlmA homologues from nine orders and ALAS from eight orders of α-proteobacteria. The constructed tree revealed three large clades: AlmA homologues, ALAS and an out-group. We reconstructed three ancestral sequences: 1) ancestral AlmA (ancAlmA) as an ancestral node of the AlmA homologues clade; 2) ancestral ALAS (ancALAS) as an ancestral node of ALAS clade; and 3) a common ancestor of AlmA and ALAS (CA) as a common ancestral node of ancAlmA and ancALAS (fig. 5A). The degree of sequence similarity between AlmA and the reconstituted ancestral enzymes was 62%–66%, whereas that between RcALAS and the reconstituted ancestral enzymes was 59%–61%. Meanwhile, the ancestral enzymes exhibited a greater extent of sequence similarity at 87%–93% between each other. Notably, the 82nd and 86th residues of ancAlmA and CA are the AlmA type, that is Ser and Gly, respectively, whereas those of ancALAS are the ALAS type, that is Thr and Ser, respectively (supplementary fig. S5, Supplementary Material online). Fig. 5.Kinetic parameters of reconstructed ancestral enzymes and modern AlmA and ALAS. (A) Phylogenetic tree based on the amino acid sequences of the AlmA homologues and ALAS. Accession numbers and class of the host of each sequence are summarized in supplementary Table S1, Supplementary Material online. The organism orders are described by two letters, and the abbreviations are shown on the right side. ALAS from α-proteobacteria are shown in blue, and AlmA are shown in orange. Cyclic ALAS (cALAS) sequences are used as the out-group. Reconstructed ancestral nodes are indicated by red arrows, and AlmA from A012304 is indicated by a black arrow. (B) Kinetic parameters of AlmA, RcALAS and reconstructed enzymes as determined by the Michaelis–Menten equation. All enzymes were his-tagged on the N-terminus, and detailed conditions of the enzymatic assay are described in the Materials and Methods section. (C) Graphical representation of kcat/Km values of each enzyme. Error bars show the standard deviation calculated from at least three experiments. (D) Complementation or growth suppression of MGHA01 by reconstructed genes. Cells grown in L medium were washed with saline and spotted after dilution on an M9 agar plate (left) and an M9 agar plate supplemented with 5 μg/mL ALA (right). Kinetic parameters of reconstructed ancestral enzymes and modern AlmA and ALAS. (A) Phylogenetic tree based on the amino acid sequences of the AlmA homologues and ALAS. Accession numbers and class of the host of each sequence are summarized in supplementary Table S1, Supplementary Material online. The organism orders are described by two letters, and the abbreviations are shown on the right side. ALAS from α-proteobacteria are shown in blue, and AlmA are shown in orange. Cyclic ALAS (cALAS) sequences are used as the out-group. Reconstructed ancestral nodes are indicated by red arrows, and AlmA from A012304 is indicated by a black arrow. (B) Kinetic parameters of AlmA, RcALAS and reconstructed enzymes as determined by the Michaelis–Menten equation. All enzymes were his-tagged on the N-terminus, and detailed conditions of the enzymatic assay are described in the Materials and Methods section. (C) Graphical representation of kcat/Km values of each enzyme. Error bars show the standard deviation calculated from at least three experiments. (D) Complementation or growth suppression of MGHA01 by reconstructed genes. Cells grown in L medium were washed with saline and spotted after dilution on an M9 agar plate (left) and an M9 agar plate supplemented with 5 μg/mL ALA (right). We purified these three ancestral enzymes and determined their kinetic parameters in vitro (fig. 5BandC). RcALAS was used as a representative for the existing ALAS. Regarding ancAlmA and CA, their Km values were smaller for serine than for glycine, whereas their kcat values were larger for serine than for glycine. Thus, the kcat/Km values for ancAlmA and CA indicate a greater catalytic efficiency for serine. The values for serine were 17 ± 5 and 82 ± 8 s−1M−1, respectively, and those for glycine were 0.084 ± 0.015 and 0.44 ± 0.06 s−1M−1, respectively. Therefore, ancAlmA and CA prefer serine to glycine as a substrate and efficiently produce intermediate I. Conversely, ancALAS exhibited catalytic activity only with glycine but not with serine. The kcat/Km value for glycine of ancALAS (0.17 ± 0.04 s−1M−1) was only 0.11% of that of RcALAS (150 ± 40 s−1M−1), which resulted from a larger Km value and a smaller kcat value. High concentrations of RcALAS (2 μM) showed a slight but significant activity using serine as a substrate, suggesting that RcALAS can synthesize intermediate I as a by-product (supplementary fig. S6, Supplementary Material online). The apparent specific activity for serine calculated from the initial reaction rate was 1.2 μmol mg−1 h−1, which is 0.48% of that of AlmA for serine (Figs. 3B and 4D). However, the intermediate I production by RcALAS showed non-linearity probably because of product inhibition. We were unable to adopt the Michaelis–Menten equation to determine the kinetic parameters of RcALAS with serine. We also performed a complementation test for MGHA01 to examine the in vivo activity of these reconstructed enzymes in vivo. The ancALAS restored the growth of MGHA01 on the M9 agar plate without ALA, whereas ancAlmA and CA did not (fig. 5D). Notably, ancAlmA and CA severely suppressed the growth of MGHA01 on the M9 ager plate even in the presence of ALA (fig. 5D). The growth recovery by ancALAS may be simply explained by its ALA synthetic activity. Meanwhile, severe growth inhibition by ancAlmA and CA probably resulted from the toxicity of intermediate I. However, the reason why ancAlmA and CA suppressed growth more severely than the original AlmA will require further analysis. According to the results of the kinetic assay and complementation test, we concluded that ancAlmA and CA may be categorized as AlmA-like enzymes, which primarily synthesize intermediate I with slight ALA synthesis activity, whereas the ancALAS may be categorized as ALAS, although its activity was much lower than the existing ALAS, such as RcALAS. Overall, our ASR analysis strongly suggests that ALAS originated from an AlmA-like antibiotic enzyme. Probable Evolutionary Trajectory of AlmA and ALAS In this section, we discuss how ALAS has evolved from an AlmA-like enzyme by combining our site-directed mutagenesis results and ASR analysis. Site-directed mutagenesis on AlmA revealed that the 82nd and 86th residues affect substrate specificity. The kinetic assay showed that the S82T/G86S substitution on AlmA resulted in a loss of function for the intermediate I synthetic activity, whereas it still sustained ALA synthetic activity (fig. 4D). The highest growth recovery by AlmA-S82T/G86S indicated that its low ALA synthetic activity was sufficient to restore the growth of the ALA auxotrophic E. coli when intermediate I synthetic activity was low enough (fig. 4C). A similar tendency was observed in case of CA (82nd Ser/86th Gly) and ancALAS (82nd Thr/86th Ser). The ancALAS lost the intermediate I synthetic activity substantially, whereas it exhibited ALA synthetic activity comparable with CA (figs. 5BandC). Consequently, ancALAS showed significant growth recovery in the complementation test. In summary, we suggest the following evolutionary model to show how ALAS evolved from an AlmA-like enzyme (fig. 6). First, an ancestral bacterium having the C5 pathway acquired an AlmA-like enzyme as an antibiotic-synthesizing enzyme. Then, the ancestor of ALAS appeared from an AlmA-like enzyme through mutations that resulted in the loss of intermediate I synthetic activity while sustaining ALA synthetic activity, and thus an ancestral α-proteobacterial organism acquired ancestral ALAS. Afterwards, the ancestral α-proteobacteria lost the C5 pathway, whereas ancestral ALAS with low ALA synthetic activity was able to develop an efficient ALA synthetic enzyme through mutations and natural selection. Thereafter, ALAS may have been inherited to an ancestral eukaryotic organism via symbiosis, when ancestral eukaryotic organisms acquired mitochondria. This is based on reports that suggest that α-proteobacterial symbiosis is the origin of mitochondria (Zimorski et al. 2014; Roger et al. 2017) and human ALAS localizes within the mitochondria (Munakata et al. 2004; Nomura et al. 2021). Overall, our evolutionary model provides new insight into how the divergence of the ALA biosynthetic pathway occurred and how the AlmA-like antibiotic synthase contributed to the origin of ALAS. Fig. 6.Hypothetical model for the evolutionary trajectory of AlmA and ALAS. Boxes indicate bacterial organisms and the colors of their frames and words show whether they utilize the C5 pathway (blue) or Shemin pathway (magenta). Evolutionary events are represented by gray arrows and gray words. A thick open arrow with a gray frame indicates the symbiotic event. Hypothetical model for the evolutionary trajectory of AlmA and ALAS. Boxes indicate bacterial organisms and the colors of their frames and words show whether they utilize the C5 pathway (blue) or Shemin pathway (magenta). Evolutionary events are represented by gray arrows and gray words. A thick open arrow with a gray frame indicates the symbiotic event. This hypothesis raises a question why ALAS holders are limited to α-proteobacteria in the bacterial domain. Unfortunately, our results were not sufficient to answer this question. The α-proteobateria involve obligate intracellular parasites, such as Rickettsia and Chlamydia, and photosynthetic bacteria such as Rhodobacter. The Shimin pathway is possibly advantageous for these organisms to survive in their habitats; alternatively, the C5 pathway is disadvantageous. However, this point needs further investigation. Hypothesis that Antibiotic Synthase Contributes to Primary Metabolic Enzyme Origination We examined the phylogenetic relationship of AlmA and ALAS and demonstrated their evolutionary trajectory, which indicates that a nonessential AlmA-like enzyme is the probable origin of the essential ALAS. In this case, the AlmA-like enzyme had acted as an “evolutionary seed,” which created a novel enzyme. We assume that the antibiotic-synthesizing enzyme, like AlmA, may be an excellent evolutionary seed for two reasons. First, since the antibiotic gene is unessential for the host, it is capable of accepting radical mutations that cause a loss of function. Secondly, antibiotics are often substrate analogues, which inhibit a target enzyme by binding to its substrate binding pocket competitively. Thus, such analogue synthesizing enzymes may be easily converted to a novel enzyme producing the substrate itself, which may be how the AlmA-like enzyme evolved to ALAS. If an evolved enzyme is dominant to a primitive one, it may be incorporated as a new part of a biosynthetic pathway. Here, we propose a hypothesis that non-essential secondary metabolic enzymes act as evolutionary seeds to generate essential primary metabolic enzymes. This would represent a novel role for antibiotics that have contributed to the evolution of life. Further studies may uncover the origin of other primary metabolic genes based on this novel evolutionary principle.