Results Sperm represses chromatin dynamics in both parental PNs We previously reported that asymmetric dynamics of the parental chromatin were established in the late zygotic stage of the embryo at 10–12 h postinsemination (hpi)1. Firstly, we confirmed the reproducibility of asymmetric chromatin dynamics in the parental chromatin (♂ > ♀) in zygotes obtained by in vitro fertilization (IVF) (Supplementary Fig. 1) and ICSI by zygotic fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (zFRAP), which revealed histone mobility (an indicator of chromatin dynamics)1,16,17. In addition, the mechanisms causing the asymmetric parental pattern were investigated by determining whether sp-mPN acquired the higher histone mobility or fPN obtained the lower histone mobility. To this end, the changes in histone mobility during the early to mid-zygotic stages were examined using parthenogenetically activated- and ICSI-derived zygotes. Although the histone mobility of the fPN was gradually decreased along with the development of the zygote, there was no significant change in histone mobility in the sp-mPN (Fig. 1a, b). Importantly, in the presence of sperm/sp-mPN, the histone mobility of the fPN was further decreased. As a result, the parental asymmetric pattern (♂ > ♀) was established by 8 hpi. The dependency of the decreased histone mobility in fPN on sp-mPN was confirmed by enucleation of the sp-mPN followed by immunostaining of histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) as a marker of the fPN (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Fig. 2). Collectively, these findings suggest that the asymmetrical histone mobility in the parental PNs was established via the acquisition of the decreased histone mobility of the fPN by a mechanism dependent on the sperm/sp-mPN.Fig. 1Sperm represses histone mobility in both parental PNs.a, b Changes in histone mobility during the early and mid-stages of ICSI and parthenogenetically activated zygotes. zFRAP analysis was performed at 4, 6, and 8 hpi or hpa. A recovery curve indicating the average fluorescence recovery rate is shown (a). The average mobile fraction (MF) is shown as a gray bar (b). Single dots indicate the MF score of each male and female pronuclei (mPN, fPN), respectively. Blue, mPN; pink, fPN-4h; orange, fPN-6h; and red, fPN-8h. For parthenogenetic (partheno)-zygotes with 2PN, the average MF score is shown. Error bar indicates the standard error (SE). The examined number of embryos (n) = 34, 36, 35, 28, 29, 28, respectively. c mPN was enucleated at 4 hpi/hpa from ICSI- and ROSI-zygotes. Two PN partheno-zygotes were prepared as controls. The remaining fPN was subjected to zFRAP analysis at 8 hpi/hpa. n = 24, 37, 30, respectively. d Illustration of the preparation of 1PN-zygotes. e Fluorescence images of each single PN: sperm-derived mPN (sp-mPN), spindle transfer-derived fPN (spt-fPN), and round spermatid-derived mPN (rs-mPN). f Average MF scores of 1PN-ICSI, -ROSI, and -spt-partheno. n = 64, 45, 45, respectively. g Two sperm were injected into enucleated MII oocytes (upper-left). Sperm (sp) were stained with Hoechst 33342. Fluorescence images of PNs: 1♂ (2sp) and 2♂ (2sp) indicate the one and two male PN-zygotes injected with two sperm (2sp), respectively (upper right and lower left). Two sperm injected into un-enucleated MII oocytes (2♂ + 1♀; lower right). h Average MF scores of the zygotes shown in g. As a control, one sperm was injected into enucleated MII- (same as 1PN-ICSI in f; 1♂(1sp)) and normal ICSI-zygotes (1♂ + 1♀). Blue and red dots indicated mPN and fPN, respectively. n = 33, 28, 14, 12, 49, respectively. i Recovery curve of ROSI-, ELSI-, tICSI-, ICSI-, and iICSI-zygotes. n = 42,39, 34, 97, 47, respectively. j Recovery curve of androgenic zygotes prepared by co-injection of sperm and round spermatid. n = 17, 17, respectively. The error bar indicates SE. Fig. 1Sperm represses histone mobility in both parental PNs.a, b Changes in histone mobility during the early and mid-stages of ICSI and parthenogenetically activated zygotes. zFRAP analysis was performed at 4, 6, and 8 hpi or hpa. A recovery curve indicating the average fluorescence recovery rate is shown (a). The average mobile fraction (MF) is shown as a gray bar (b). Single dots indicate the MF score of each male and female pronuclei (mPN, fPN), respectively. Blue, mPN; pink, fPN-4h; orange, fPN-6h; and red, fPN-8h. For parthenogenetic (partheno)-zygotes with 2PN, the average MF score is shown. Error bar indicates the standard error (SE). The examined number of embryos (n) = 34, 36, 35, 28, 29, 28, respectively. c mPN was enucleated at 4 hpi/hpa from ICSI- and ROSI-zygotes. Two PN partheno-zygotes were prepared as controls. The remaining fPN was subjected to zFRAP analysis at 8 hpi/hpa. n = 24, 37, 30, respectively. d Illustration of the preparation of 1PN-zygotes. e Fluorescence images of each single PN: sperm-derived mPN (sp-mPN), spindle transfer-derived fPN (spt-fPN), and round spermatid-derived mPN (rs-mPN). f Average MF scores of 1PN-ICSI, -ROSI, and -spt-partheno. n = 64, 45, 45, respectively. g Two sperm were injected into enucleated MII oocytes (upper-left). Sperm (sp) were stained with Hoechst 33342. Fluorescence images of PNs: 1♂ (2sp) and 2♂ (2sp) indicate the one and two male PN-zygotes injected with two sperm (2sp), respectively (upper right and lower left). Two sperm injected into un-enucleated MII oocytes (2♂ + 1♀; lower right). h Average MF scores of the zygotes shown in g. As a control, one sperm was injected into enucleated MII- (same as 1PN-ICSI in f; 1♂(1sp)) and normal ICSI-zygotes (1♂ + 1♀). Blue and red dots indicated mPN and fPN, respectively. n = 33, 28, 14, 12, 49, respectively. i Recovery curve of ROSI-, ELSI-, tICSI-, ICSI-, and iICSI-zygotes. n = 42,39, 34, 97, 47, respectively. j Recovery curve of androgenic zygotes prepared by co-injection of sperm and round spermatid. n = 17, 17, respectively. The error bar indicates SE. Sperm represses histone mobility in both parental PNs. a, b Changes in histone mobility during the early and mid-stages of ICSI and parthenogenetically activated zygotes. zFRAP analysis was performed at 4, 6, and 8 hpi or hpa. A recovery curve indicating the average fluorescence recovery rate is shown (a). The average mobile fraction (MF) is shown as a gray bar (b). Single dots indicate the MF score of each male and female pronuclei (mPN, fPN), respectively. Blue, mPN; pink, fPN-4h; orange, fPN-6h; and red, fPN-8h. For parthenogenetic (partheno)-zygotes with 2PN, the average MF score is shown. Error bar indicates the standard error (SE). The examined number of embryos (n) = 34, 36, 35, 28, 29, 28, respectively. c mPN was enucleated at 4 hpi/hpa from ICSI- and ROSI-zygotes. Two PN partheno-zygotes were prepared as controls. The remaining fPN was subjected to zFRAP analysis at 8 hpi/hpa. n = 24, 37, 30, respectively. d Illustration of the preparation of 1PN-zygotes. e Fluorescence images of each single PN: sperm-derived mPN (sp-mPN), spindle transfer-derived fPN (spt-fPN), and round spermatid-derived mPN (rs-mPN). f Average MF scores of 1PN-ICSI, -ROSI, and -spt-partheno. n = 64, 45, 45, respectively. g Two sperm were injected into enucleated MII oocytes (upper-left). Sperm (sp) were stained with Hoechst 33342. Fluorescence images of PNs: 1♂ (2sp) and 2♂ (2sp) indicate the one and two male PN-zygotes injected with two sperm (2sp), respectively (upper right and lower left). Two sperm injected into un-enucleated MII oocytes (2♂ + 1♀; lower right). h Average MF scores of the zygotes shown in g. As a control, one sperm was injected into enucleated MII- (same as 1PN-ICSI in f; 1♂(1sp)) and normal ICSI-zygotes (1♂ + 1♀). Blue and red dots indicated mPN and fPN, respectively. n = 33, 28, 14, 12, 49, respectively. i Recovery curve of ROSI-, ELSI-, tICSI-, ICSI-, and iICSI-zygotes. n = 42,39, 34, 97, 47, respectively. j Recovery curve of androgenic zygotes prepared by co-injection of sperm and round spermatid. n = 17, 17, respectively. The error bar indicates SE. Next, in order to determine whether the mechanisms underlying sp-mPN-dependent decreasing histone mobility were also activated in the sp-mPN itself, 1PN-ICSI were constructed by ICSI with enucleated metaphase II (MII) oocytes (Fig. 1d). The histone mobility of a single sp-mPN was lower than a single fPN of parthenogenetic zygotes (1PN-spt-partheno), although both appeared similar, suggesting that the decreasing histone mobility mechanism of sp-mPN worked on its own (Fig. 1e, f and Supplementary Fig. 3a). Higher eGFP-H2B expression levels may result in higher histone mobility. We compared eGFP-H2B expression levels between 1PN-ICSI and 1PN-spt-partheno and confirmed that the histone mobility was determined regardless of the expression level of eGFP-H2B (Supplementary Fig. 3b, c), suggesting that histone mobility reflects a chromatin state. Further confirmation by ICSI was conducted with the use of enucleated MII oocytes fertilized with two sperm (2sp) (i.e., 1♂ (2sp) and 2♂ (2sp) in Fig. 1g, h and Supplementary Fig. 4a), which showed that the additional sperm resulted in further decreasing of histone mobility in each sp-mPN (Fig. 1h and Supplementary Fig. 4b). In zygotes formed by ICSI with two sp-mPNs and an un-enucleated oocyte (2♂ + 1♀), two sp-mPNs were comparable to one fPN and disruption of the parental asymmetric pattern (♂≒♀). Importantly, there was no significant difference between the fPNs of 2♂ + 1♀ and that of 1♂ + 1♀ (ctrl), indicating that the histone mobility of the fPNs was already decreased to almost the possible limit even in the presence of only one sperm. On the other hand, to decrease the histone mobility of sp-mPN to this level, at least two sperm were needed. Thus, the sp-mPN exhibited innate resistance to the ability for decreasing histone mobility. The zygotes harboring two fPNs with a single sp-mPN (1♂ + 2♀) still exhibited the parental asymmetric pattern (Supplementary Fig. 5). Thus, the additional chromatin from the fPN failed to disrupt the parental asymmetric pattern, indicating scarce or little repressive effect on histone mobility by fPN. Altogether, these results suggest that although the paternally repressive effect on histone mobility works on both parental PNs, parental asymmetric chromatin dynamics were established due to differences in sensitivity to this effect. Notably, 1PN ICSI and 1PN-spt-partheno have similar-sized PN, but they showed distinct histone mobilities (Fig. 1e, f). Furthermore, 1♂ (2sp) and 2♂ (2sp) zygotes whose PN sizes were different, showed similar histone mobility levels (Fig. 1g, h), indicating that histone mobility was determined regardless of PN size. To examine where the paternal ability for the decreasing histone mobility in both parental PNs was acquired among the stages during spermiogenesis, zFRAP analysis of the zygotes fertilized by various micro-insemination methods (ROSI, ELSI, tICSI, and ICSI, see legend of Supplementary Fig. 6a) was performed at 8 hpi or hours post-activation (hpa). First, due to histone–protamine replacement during spermiogenesis, histone protein is drastically reduced in spermatozoa18,19. Therefore, it was possible that sp-mPN in ICSI-zygotes acquired the extremely higher amounts of eGFP-H2B and affected histone mobility. However, eGFP-H2B expression levels were not different between sp-mPN and rs-mPN (Supplementary Fig. 6b, c). Male PNs of zygotes obtained by ROSI and ICSI exhibited similar levels of histone mobility (Fig. 1i and Supplementary Fig. 6d). In contrast, the extent of histone mobility of the fPNs of these zygotes was decreased along with the maturity of the male germ cells (Fig. 1i and Supplementary Fig. 6d, e). Thus, these results suggested that paternal ability to repress histone mobility and its resistance acquired during spermiogenesis. Furthermore, fPN in ROSI-zygotes showed a higher histone mobility than ICSI-zygotes, indicating the scarce or little repressive effect on histone mobility by fPN. During spermiogenesis, sperm acquires the ability to induce oocyte activation, which leads to the initiation of the zygotic cell cycle from meiotically arrested MII oocytes after fertilization. This ability can be easily inactivated by alkali treatment (Supplementary Fig. 6f)20. To examine whether this ability was involved in the parental asymmetric chromatin dynamics, histone mobility in the parental chromatin of the zygotes obtained by ICSI with the use of sperm that had been inactivated by alkali treatment (inactivated ICSI: iICSI) was only slightly decreased as compared to that of the ICSI-zygotes (Fig. 1i and Supplementary Fig. 6d, e), indicating that parental asymmetric chromatin dynamics acquired during spermiogenesis could not be explained by the activation capacity of the oocyte. A variant of histone H3, H3.3, is considered important to establish open chromatin structure in parental PN after fertilization21–23. Therefore, we examined whether the differences of titration capacity of H3.3/Hira (H3.3 specific chaperon) were correlated with the chromatin dynamics in parental PNs of ROSI-, and ICSI-zygotes. However, there was no correlation between histone mobility and each level of endogenous or exogeneous H3.3 and Hira, thereby indicating that it could not explain the levels of histone mobility in parental PNs in ROSI- and ICSI-zygotes by H3.3 level (Supplementary Fig. 7). Correct discrimination of parental chromatin in ROSI-zygotes was confirmed by zFRAP analysis with maternal PNs from enucleated zygotes followed by immunocytochemical analysis of H3K9me3 as a marker of the fPNs (Supplementary Fig. 8). The inability of round spermatid to decrease histone mobility was confirmed by 1PN-ROSI, which showed a comparable level of histone mobility of 1PN-spt-partheno (Fig. 1f, purple). In addition, 2PN androgenic zygotes formed by sp-mPN, with comparatively greater histone mobility, and round spermatid-derived from the male PN (rs-mPN), with relatively less histone mobility (Fig. 1j and Supplementary Fig. 9), indicated that the round spermatid had not yet acquired resistance to the ability for decreasing histone mobility. Furthermore, in the presence of sp-mPN, the histone mobility of the rs-mPN was decreased to the same level as that of the fPN (Supplementary Fig. 10). These findings were consistent with the disruption of the asymmetric histone mobility of the parental PN in zygotes obtained by ROSI. Parental PNs compete for histone mobility-promoting factors As shown in Fig. 1f, h, the chromatin of 1PN-zygotes (namely, 1PN-spt-partheno and 1PN-ROSI) and even 1PN-ICSI-zygotes, was extremely dynamic as compared to that of ICSI-zygotes with two parental PNs (1♂ (1sp) vs. 1♂ + 1♀ (1sp)). The results of our previous study revealed that oocytes harbored high histone mobility and chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 9 (CHD9) participated in the regulation of the histone mobility24. Furthermore, in another previous study, the transferred somatic cell nuclei into enucleated oocytes acquired a higher histone mobility, indicating the presence of factors promoting chromatin dynamics in oocytes and zygotes1. These findings prompted the hypothesis that the concentration of factors promoting histone mobility into a single PN led to the extremely dynamic chromatin structure. At the same time, such factors were distributed to the parental PNs. To examine this possibility, parthenogenetically activated oocytes were constructed with various numbers of fPNs (1, 2, and 4 fPNs; Fig. 2a), which enabled exclusion of the sp-mPN-derived the repressive effect on histone mobility. As expected, the extent of histone mobility decreased along with the increase in the number of PNs and the fPNs in the same zygotes showed a similar level of histone mobility (Fig. 2b and Supplementary Fig. 11). These results suggest that the chromatin dynamics promoting factors are present in the zygotes and at least, in parthenogenetic zygotes, the fPNs competed for these factors.Fig. 2Parental PNs compete for chromatin dynamics promoting factors.a Illustration of the preparation of 1, 2, and 4PN partheno-zygotes and fluorescence images of the fPNs. Sr indicates strontium, which induces oocyte activation. b Average MF scores of the partheno-zygotes prepared as shown in a. n = 66, 43, 19, respectively. c Illustration of the preparation of sp-mPN-enucleated zygotes. d Average MF scores of the zygotes prepared as shown in c. Blue, mPN; pink, fPN-8h; orange, fPN-10h; and red, fPN-11h). Asterisks indicate significant differences. Illustration of the preparation of delay ICSI-zygotes. n = 24, 24, 26, 30, 29, 26, respectively. e Illustration of the preparation of delay ICSI-zygotes. f Control and delay ICSI are shown. The second polar body is indicated with a red arrow. Fluorescence images of the mPN and fPN. The inset shows lower magnification images of the second polar body near the fPN. g Average MF scores of the delay ICSI-zygotes prepared as shown in e, f. n = 30, 29, 23, respectively. The error bar indicates SE. Fig. 2Parental PNs compete for chromatin dynamics promoting factors.a Illustration of the preparation of 1, 2, and 4PN partheno-zygotes and fluorescence images of the fPNs. Sr indicates strontium, which induces oocyte activation. b Average MF scores of the partheno-zygotes prepared as shown in a. n = 66, 43, 19, respectively. c Illustration of the preparation of sp-mPN-enucleated zygotes. d Average MF scores of the zygotes prepared as shown in c. Blue, mPN; pink, fPN-8h; orange, fPN-10h; and red, fPN-11h). Asterisks indicate significant differences. Illustration of the preparation of delay ICSI-zygotes. n = 24, 24, 26, 30, 29, 26, respectively. e Illustration of the preparation of delay ICSI-zygotes. f Control and delay ICSI are shown. The second polar body is indicated with a red arrow. Fluorescence images of the mPN and fPN. The inset shows lower magnification images of the second polar body near the fPN. g Average MF scores of the delay ICSI-zygotes prepared as shown in e, f. n = 30, 29, 23, respectively. The error bar indicates SE. Parental PNs compete for chromatin dynamics promoting factors. a Illustration of the preparation of 1, 2, and 4PN partheno-zygotes and fluorescence images of the fPNs. Sr indicates strontium, which induces oocyte activation. b Average MF scores of the partheno-zygotes prepared as shown in a. n = 66, 43, 19, respectively. c Illustration of the preparation of sp-mPN-enucleated zygotes. d Average MF scores of the zygotes prepared as shown in c. Blue, mPN; pink, fPN-8h; orange, fPN-10h; and red, fPN-11h). Asterisks indicate significant differences. Illustration of the preparation of delay ICSI-zygotes. n = 24, 24, 26, 30, 29, 26, respectively. e Illustration of the preparation of delay ICSI-zygotes. f Control and delay ICSI are shown. The second polar body is indicated with a red arrow. Fluorescence images of the mPN and fPN. The inset shows lower magnification images of the second polar body near the fPN. g Average MF scores of the delay ICSI-zygotes prepared as shown in e, f. n = 30, 29, 23, respectively. The error bar indicates SE. If the parental PNs compete for factors that promote histone mobility, the lack of one parental PN should cause excess histone mobility in another. Therefore, the potential of excess histone mobility in fPN was investigated with the use of enucleation of sp-mPNs (Fig. 2c). In sp-mPN-enucleated-zygotes, histone mobility of the fPN gradually increased along with the progression of zygotic development (Fig. 2d). In contrast, zFRAP analysis of ICSI-zygotes at 8, 10, and 11 hpi showed that the extent of histone mobility was maintained in both parental PNs. Thus, the parental PNs competed for the chromatin dynamics promoting factors. Next, the effect of delayed PN formation6 on parental asymmetry was investigated. To this end, delayed ICSI-zygotes were constructed and then analyzed by zFRAP (Fig. 2e). Observation of PN formation of delay ICSI-zygotes revealed the reversal of PN size, larger or smaller, between parental PNs (Fig. 2f). zFRAP analysis revealed that asymmetric histone mobility of the parental chromatin was compromised along with an increased delay time of ICSI (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Fig. 12a). Particularly, almost all the 2 h-delayed ICSI-zygotes showed a reversed parental asymmetric pattern (♂ < ♀) (Supplementary Fig. 12b). A delay of only 1 h resulted in a considerable change in PN size and the fPN showed higher histone mobility than that of the sp-mPN. Collectively, these results indicate that parental PNs compete for histone mobility-promoting factors and the state of the zygotic chromatin is regulated by an antagonistic balance between the repressive effects on chromatin dynamics derived from the sperm and the promoting effect from the oocyte. Furthermore, it is possible that the sp-mPN might have obtained more such promoting factors than the fPN, resulting in self-resistance to the repressive effect. Notably, delaying fertilization timing was sufficient to reverse the parental asymmetry regardless of sperm deriving ability to decrease histone mobility, suggesting that the histone mobility-promoting factors were predominant in the regulation of parental asymmetric chromatin dynamics. Chromatin dynamics play a regulatory role for the establishment of parental asymmetric transcriptional activity High histone mobility is anticipated to be important in the zygotic transcriptional permissive state25,26. sp-mPN has higher transcriptional ability possibly due to a more transcriptional permissive chromatin state than fPN15. Thus, we hypothesized that higher histone mobility in sp-mPN is important for regulating parental asymmetric transcriptional activities. To examine this, we took advantage of our discovery that delayed ICSI induced the reversed parental asymmetric chromatin dynamics (Fig. 2e–g). As expected, the longer delay reduced transcriptional activity in sp-mPN, and eventually reversed parental asymmetric transcription was observed (Fig. 3a, b). Thus, reversed parental asymmetric chromatin dynamics reversed the parental asymmetric transcriptional activity, demonstrating that chromatin dynamics is positively correlated with the zygotic transcriptional activity. Considering that eviction and deposition of histone H2B could be coupled with transcription, it is possible that lowered transcriptional activity caused slower histone mobility. Nevertheless, the treatment with alpha-amanitin (ama), which is a RNA-polymerase II (Pol II) inhibitor, led to no reduction of histone mobility, indicating that histone mobility was not governed by transcriptional activity, but rather that chromatin dynamics regulate transcriptional activity (Fig. 3c). Importantly, in Fig. 2g, the chromatin dynamics were reversed only by a 1 h delay but in Fig. 3b it took as long as 2 h to completely reverse the parental asymmetry. These results suggest that chromatin dynamics positively regulates zygotic transcriptional activity, though it is not the sole factor. We further examined whether other RNA-polymerase, RNA-polymerase I, and III (Pol I and Pol III), dependent transcriptions also did not regulate the establishment of parental asymmetric chromatin dynamics by using actinomycin D (Act D) and Pol III inhibitor (Pol IIIi). Act D could block not only Pol I but also DNA polymerase; however, in our experiment, DNA replication was not affected (Supplementary Fig. 13). Surprisingly, both inhibitors induced the reduction of histone mobility particularly in sp-mPN, suggesting that Pol I and Pol III mediated transcription caused in the higher histone mobility observed in sp-mPN (Fig. 3c).Fig. 3Chromatin dynamics play a regulatory role for the establishment of parental asymmetric transcriptional activity.a Fluorescence images of 5-EU incorporation in delay ICSI-zygotes were shown. b Relative fluorescent signals were shown in the bar graph. Asterisks show significant differences by paired t-test. n = 27, 29, 24, respectively. c The average Recovery curve and MF scores of IVF- zygotes treated with 100-µg/ml α-amanitin, 0.1-µg/ml Act. D, 20-µM Pol IIIi and control zygotes were treated with 1 (Act. D) or 0.1% (Pol IIIi) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were shown. Treatment with these inhibitors started soon after mRNA injection (around 2hpi). zFRAP analysis was started at 8 hpi. n = 32, 26, 28, 29, 28, 28, respectively. d Schematic illustration, indicating male germ cells acquire the ability to repress chromatin dynamics and resistance during spermiogenesis. e In the zygotes, parental PNs compete for oocyte-derived histone mobility-promoting factors (red arrows) and the sperm-derived repressive factors (blue arrows), which are antagonistic. Probably, more histone mobility-promoting factors caused a more dynamic state and conferred resistance to reduce histone mobility in the sp-mPN. In the delayed ICSI-zygotes, more promoting factors in fPN caused reversed parental asymmetry. The error bar indicates SE. Fig. 3Chromatin dynamics play a regulatory role for the establishment of parental asymmetric transcriptional activity.a Fluorescence images of 5-EU incorporation in delay ICSI-zygotes were shown. b Relative fluorescent signals were shown in the bar graph. Asterisks show significant differences by paired t-test. n = 27, 29, 24, respectively. c The average Recovery curve and MF scores of IVF- zygotes treated with 100-µg/ml α-amanitin, 0.1-µg/ml Act. D, 20-µM Pol IIIi and control zygotes were treated with 1 (Act. D) or 0.1% (Pol IIIi) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were shown. Treatment with these inhibitors started soon after mRNA injection (around 2hpi). zFRAP analysis was started at 8 hpi. n = 32, 26, 28, 29, 28, 28, respectively. d Schematic illustration, indicating male germ cells acquire the ability to repress chromatin dynamics and resistance during spermiogenesis. e In the zygotes, parental PNs compete for oocyte-derived histone mobility-promoting factors (red arrows) and the sperm-derived repressive factors (blue arrows), which are antagonistic. Probably, more histone mobility-promoting factors caused a more dynamic state and conferred resistance to reduce histone mobility in the sp-mPN. In the delayed ICSI-zygotes, more promoting factors in fPN caused reversed parental asymmetry. The error bar indicates SE. Chromatin dynamics play a regulatory role for the establishment of parental asymmetric transcriptional activity. a Fluorescence images of 5-EU incorporation in delay ICSI-zygotes were shown. b Relative fluorescent signals were shown in the bar graph. Asterisks show significant differences by paired t-test. n = 27, 29, 24, respectively. c The average Recovery curve and MF scores of IVF- zygotes treated with 100-µg/ml α-amanitin, 0.1-µg/ml Act. D, 20-µM Pol IIIi and control zygotes were treated with 1 (Act. D) or 0.1% (Pol IIIi) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were shown. Treatment with these inhibitors started soon after mRNA injection (around 2hpi). zFRAP analysis was started at 8 hpi. n = 32, 26, 28, 29, 28, 28, respectively. d Schematic illustration, indicating male germ cells acquire the ability to repress chromatin dynamics and resistance during spermiogenesis. e In the zygotes, parental PNs compete for oocyte-derived histone mobility-promoting factors (red arrows) and the sperm-derived repressive factors (blue arrows), which are antagonistic. Probably, more histone mobility-promoting factors caused a more dynamic state and conferred resistance to reduce histone mobility in the sp-mPN. In the delayed ICSI-zygotes, more promoting factors in fPN caused reversed parental asymmetry. The error bar indicates SE.