Results Synthesis and in vitro testing of putative ClbP inhibitors To design a specific inhibitor of colibactin biosynthesis, we targeted the colibactin-activating enzyme ClbP. This membrane-embedded periplasmic serine peptidase is essential for the genotoxicity of pks+
E. coli. Genetic deletion of ClbP results in an accumulation of biosynthetic intermediates and shunt metabolites from the nonribosomal peptide synthetase–polyketide synthase assembly line, termed ‘candidate precolibactins,’ many of which have been structurally characterized30,31. This enzyme is an attractive target for inhibition as it belongs to the same enzyme family as β-lactamases like AmpC, which have been successfully targeted with small molecule inhibitors13,32. However, ClbP is not inhibited by several known β-lactamase inhibitors or broad-spectrum serine hydrolase inhibitors in vitro33. Although one study identified a pair of boronic acid-based ClbP inhibitors using in silico screening34, we found that these compounds have minimal impact on ClbP’s catalytic activity in vitro or in bacterial culture33. Thus, there are currently no potent and/or selective inhibitors of this enzyme available. ClbP contains a catalytic triad typical of the S12 family of serine peptidases formed by the essential residues S95, K98 and Y186 (ref. 13). We aimed to target S95 by exploiting ClbP’s essential and unusual acyl-d-Asn substrate-recognition motif (Fig. 1a). Boron-based electrophiles have frequently been employed in inhibitors of serine and threonine peptidases35, but posed a synthetic challenge here because of the proximity of the potentially nucleophilic asparagine side chain. We ultimately accessed a small panel of pinacol boronate esters: MRV03-037 (1), MRV03-068 (2), MRV03-069 (3) and MRV03-070 (4), which are precursors of the corresponding boronic acids, using an enantioselective copper-catalyzed hydroboration reaction of an ester intermediate followed by ammonolysis (Fig. 1b)36.Fig. 1Activity of ClbP guides rational design of colibactin biosynthesis inhibitors.a, ClbP activates colibactin by removing an N-myristoyl-d-Asn prodrug scaffold (red). Hydrolysis of two amide bonds by ClbP leads to the formation of two electrophilic warheads (cyan) capable of DNA alkylation. Inhibitor design was guided by the two key recognition features of the prodrug scaffold: a d-Asn side chain, which is essential, and a lipid group, which can be modified. b, Synthesis of ClbP inhibitors: (i) Pd(OAc)2, NaOAc, trifluoroacetic acid, PhMe, 80 °C, 12 h; (ii) CuCl (0.1 equivalent), (R)-SEGPHOS (0.11 equivalent), bis(pinacolato)diboron (1.1 equivalents), KOt-Bu (1 equivalent), MeOH (4 equivalents), tetrahydrofuran, 3 h; (iii) NaCN (0.2 equivalent), NH3, MeOH, 1 h. e.r., enantiomeric ratio. Fig. 1Activity of ClbP guides rational design of colibactin biosynthesis inhibitors.a, ClbP activates colibactin by removing an N-myristoyl-d-Asn prodrug scaffold (red). Hydrolysis of two amide bonds by ClbP leads to the formation of two electrophilic warheads (cyan) capable of DNA alkylation. Inhibitor design was guided by the two key recognition features of the prodrug scaffold: a d-Asn side chain, which is essential, and a lipid group, which can be modified. b, Synthesis of ClbP inhibitors: (i) Pd(OAc)2, NaOAc, trifluoroacetic acid, PhMe, 80 °C, 12 h; (ii) CuCl (0.1 equivalent), (R)-SEGPHOS (0.11 equivalent), bis(pinacolato)diboron (1.1 equivalents), KOt-Bu (1 equivalent), MeOH (4 equivalents), tetrahydrofuran, 3 h; (iii) NaCN (0.2 equivalent), NH3, MeOH, 1 h. e.r., enantiomeric ratio. Activity of ClbP guides rational design of colibactin biosynthesis inhibitors. a, ClbP activates colibactin by removing an N-myristoyl-d-Asn prodrug scaffold (red). Hydrolysis of two amide bonds by ClbP leads to the formation of two electrophilic warheads (cyan) capable of DNA alkylation. Inhibitor design was guided by the two key recognition features of the prodrug scaffold: a d-Asn side chain, which is essential, and a lipid group, which can be modified. b, Synthesis of ClbP inhibitors: (i) Pd(OAc)2, NaOAc, trifluoroacetic acid, PhMe, 80 °C, 12 h; (ii) CuCl (0.1 equivalent), (R)-SEGPHOS (0.11 equivalent), bis(pinacolato)diboron (1.1 equivalents), KOt-Bu (1 equivalent), MeOH (4 equivalents), tetrahydrofuran, 3 h; (iii) NaCN (0.2 equivalent), NH3, MeOH, 1 h. e.r., enantiomeric ratio. This panel of compounds was initially evaluated using an in vitro fluorogenic ClbP activity assay33. With 25 nM purified ClbP, all compounds had median inhibitory concentration (IC50) values between 20 and 80 nM after 1 h preincubation, indicating similar potency (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Table 1). Because these compounds were designed to inhibit ClbP by forming a covalent bond with the critical active site serine residue, we examined the kinetics of inhibition using this assay. Highly potent boronic acid-based inhibitors often exhibit slow-binding kinetics, where the free inhibitor is in equilibrium with the noncovalently bound inhibitor–enzyme complex and the subsequent covalent bond-forming step is rate-limiting37. As expected for this type of binding, preincubating 100 nM 1–4 with ClbP for varying amounts of time confirmed that longer preincubation leads to increased potency (Fig. 2b). Although 1–3 reached maximum potency within 30 min, 4 showed a substantial lag, suggesting that the initial noncovalent complex of 4 with ClbP is weaker. Previous work showed that ClbP substrates with smaller acyl groups exhibit higher KM values, so the relatively smaller phenyl substituent of 4 may explain this difference33. Further control experiments ruled out boronate ester hydrolysis as being rate-limiting (Extended Data Fig. 1).Fig. 2Compounds 1–4 inhibit ClbP activity.a, ClbP activity in vitro upon treatment with 1–4 using a fluorescent substrate analog. b, ClbP activity in vitro upon treatment with 1–4 at 100 nM and varying incubation time before initiating the assay. c, Activity of E. coli overexpressing ClbP toward a fluorescent substrate analog after treatment with 1–4. For panels a–c, symbols show mean value of n = 4 biological replicates for each condition, error bars are 1 s.d. d, LC–MS measurement of N-myristoyl-d-asparagine released from BWpks after treatment with vehicle or 1–4. n = 3 biological replicates. ****P < 0.0001; not significant (NS), P > 0.05, one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparison test. See Methods for calculation of percent activity in fluorescence assays.Source data Fig. 2Compounds 1–4 inhibit ClbP activity.a, ClbP activity in vitro upon treatment with 1–4 using a fluorescent substrate analog. b, ClbP activity in vitro upon treatment with 1–4 at 100 nM and varying incubation time before initiating the assay. c, Activity of E. coli overexpressing ClbP toward a fluorescent substrate analog after treatment with 1–4. For panels a–c, symbols show mean value of n = 4 biological replicates for each condition, error bars are 1 s.d. d, LC–MS measurement of N-myristoyl-d-asparagine released from BWpks after treatment with vehicle or 1–4. n = 3 biological replicates. ****P < 0.0001; not significant (NS), P > 0.05, one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparison test. See Methods for calculation of percent activity in fluorescence assays.Source data Compounds 1–4 inhibit ClbP activity. a, ClbP activity in vitro upon treatment with 1–4 using a fluorescent substrate analog. b, ClbP activity in vitro upon treatment with 1–4 at 100 nM and varying incubation time before initiating the assay. c, Activity of E. coli overexpressing ClbP toward a fluorescent substrate analog after treatment with 1–4. For panels a–c, symbols show mean value of n = 4 biological replicates for each condition, error bars are 1 s.d. d, LC–MS measurement of N-myristoyl-d-asparagine released from BWpks after treatment with vehicle or 1–4. n = 3 biological replicates. ****P < 0.0001; not significant (NS), P > 0.05, one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparison test. See Methods for calculation of percent activity in fluorescence assays. Source data Using E. coli overexpressing ClbP and the same fluorescent reporter yielded IC50 values in the range of 4–40 nM for compounds 1–4, indicating that the E. coli outer membrane does not impede inhibitor efficacy (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Table 1). To confirm that these inhibitors prevent cleavage of precolibactin by ClbP, we treated a laboratory strain carrying the pks island on a bacterial artificial chromosome (E. coli BW25113 BACpks, ‘BWpks’) with 1–4 or a DMSO control and quantified the amount of N-myristoyl-d-Asn released by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS; Fig. 2d). All compounds decreased the quantity of prodrug released, but compound 4 showed slightly lower potency than the others in this format. Establishing the mechanism of ClbP inhibition To directly examine the interaction between an inhibitor and ClbP, we obtained a crystal structure of full-length ClbP bound to 1 because it bears the same type of aliphatic linear hydrocarbon tail as the native prodrug scaffold (PDB 7MDC, Supplementary Table 2). In this structure, the d-Asn side chain of the inhibitor projects into a tight-fitting pocket and hydrogen bonds with the side chains of residues S188, H257 and N331 (Fig. 3a). N331 also hydrogen bonds to E92, setting its orientation and helping to enforce ClbP’s selectivity for d-Asn- over d-Asp-containing substrates. Other enzyme–substrate interactions and features of interest in the complete structure of ClbP are detailed in a companion paper38.Fig. 3Compound 1 binds the catalytic serine of ClbP directly.a, A 2.7-Å resolution structure of ClbP crystallized in the presence of 1 shows the compound (cyan sticks) bound in the expected pocket of the active site near the catalytic triad. Continuous electron density in the polder difference map contoured at 7σ (gray mesh) indicates the inhibitor is covalently bound to S95. b, A 90° rotation relative to a details the 2Fo–Fc density map contoured at 1σ for the inhibitor and proximal residues. N331 mediates recognition of the d-Asn side chain. c, The boronate ester, a structural mimic of the tetrahedral intermediates in colibactin hydrolysis, is stabilized by hydrogen bonds from Q330 and Y186. Fig. 3Compound 1 binds the catalytic serine of ClbP directly.a, A 2.7-Å resolution structure of ClbP crystallized in the presence of 1 shows the compound (cyan sticks) bound in the expected pocket of the active site near the catalytic triad. Continuous electron density in the polder difference map contoured at 7σ (gray mesh) indicates the inhibitor is covalently bound to S95. b, A 90° rotation relative to a details the 2Fo–Fc density map contoured at 1σ for the inhibitor and proximal residues. N331 mediates recognition of the d-Asn side chain. c, The boronate ester, a structural mimic of the tetrahedral intermediates in colibactin hydrolysis, is stabilized by hydrogen bonds from Q330 and Y186. Compound 1 binds the catalytic serine of ClbP directly. a, A 2.7-Å resolution structure of ClbP crystallized in the presence of 1 shows the compound (cyan sticks) bound in the expected pocket of the active site near the catalytic triad. Continuous electron density in the polder difference map contoured at 7σ (gray mesh) indicates the inhibitor is covalently bound to S95. b, A 90° rotation relative to a details the 2Fo–Fc density map contoured at 1σ for the inhibitor and proximal residues. N331 mediates recognition of the d-Asn side chain. c, The boronate ester, a structural mimic of the tetrahedral intermediates in colibactin hydrolysis, is stabilized by hydrogen bonds from Q330 and Y186. The inhibitor-bound structure of ClbP also reveals continuous electron density from the S95 side chain to the ligand (Fig. 3a), indicating essentially complete conversion to a covalent protein–inhibitor complex. This boronate complex is a structural analog of the tetrahedral intermediates formed during amide bond hydrolysis and participates in several stabilizing interactions that are likely relevant to the activation of precolibactin. The backbone amides of Q330 and S95 hydrogen bond to one of the boronate oxygen atoms and are thus well positioned to stabilize the negative charge that accumulates upon formation of the covalent bond with S95. In addition, Y186, which is part of the catalytic triad that defines this enzyme family, is positioned to stabilize this complex by donating a hydrogen bond to either the other boronate oxygen atom or the oxygen nucleophile on the serine side chain (Fig. 3c). Thus, the potency of these ClbP inhibitors arises both from their ability to mimic the hydrogen-bonding interactions of intermediates in the hydrolysis of precolibactin and the formation of a covalent bond with the catalytic serine residue. Selectivity of ClbP inhibitors Having established that this group of compounds can bind and inhibit ClbP with high potency, we next focused on establishing the selectivity of these interactions. Because our structural studies suggest that ClbP can only accept inhibitors of this class with the S stereochemical configuration, we selected a high-potency inhibitor, 3, and synthesized the opposite enantiomer, MRV03-095 (5). We hypothesized that 5 would be a much less potent inhibitor given that N-acyl-l-Asn-containing substrates are not accepted by ClbP14,33. Indeed, 5 is 40-fold less potent than 3 at inhibiting the release of the prodrug from BWpks (Fig. 4a). The weak inhibitory effect of 5 likely results from the presence of a small amount of 3 as an expected minor product of our synthetic route. Both compounds were prepared in an enantiomeric ratio of 95:5 (determined by chiral LC–MS, Extended Data Fig. 2) for the desired versus undesired enantiomer.Fig. 4Compound 3 is selective for ClbP inhibition and active in a community setting.a, LC–MS measurement of N-myristoyl-d-Asn released from BWpks after treatment with 3 or 5. n = 3 biological replicates, individual replicates shown. b, Volcano plot representation of metabolites detected by LC–MS that are altered in BWpks treated with 1 µM of compound 3 versus untreated (left) and BWΔP versus BWpks (right). Previously characterized colibactin precursor metabolites are labeled with their m/z. n = 5 biological replicates for all conditions. c, Gel-based ABPP using a FP-biotin probe to examine the reactivity of serine hydrolases in E. coli and HEK293T cell lysates does not identify any major targets of compound 3. ClbP is not detected in this assay because of a lack of interaction between it and FP. d, LC–MS measurement of the prodrug scaffold in extracts of E. coli NC101 and E. coli NC101ΔclbP cultured with and without compound 3 and with or without a community of organisms resuspended from fecal pellets of C57BL/6J mice. The levels of prodrug scaffold observed in conditions 3 and 4 are expected as a side product from the upstream enzymes in colibactin biosynthesis. n = 3 biological replicates for all conditions, individual replicates shown. Empty circles are below the limit of quantitation for this protocol (4 nM). ****P < 0.0001; *P < 0.05; NS, P > 0.05; one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test.Source data Fig. 4Compound 3 is selective for ClbP inhibition and active in a community setting.a, LC–MS measurement of N-myristoyl-d-Asn released from BWpks after treatment with 3 or 5. n = 3 biological replicates, individual replicates shown. b, Volcano plot representation of metabolites detected by LC–MS that are altered in BWpks treated with 1 µM of compound 3 versus untreated (left) and BWΔP versus BWpks (right). Previously characterized colibactin precursor metabolites are labeled with their m/z. n = 5 biological replicates for all conditions. c, Gel-based ABPP using a FP-biotin probe to examine the reactivity of serine hydrolases in E. coli and HEK293T cell lysates does not identify any major targets of compound 3. ClbP is not detected in this assay because of a lack of interaction between it and FP. d, LC–MS measurement of the prodrug scaffold in extracts of E. coli NC101 and E. coli NC101ΔclbP cultured with and without compound 3 and with or without a community of organisms resuspended from fecal pellets of C57BL/6J mice. The levels of prodrug scaffold observed in conditions 3 and 4 are expected as a side product from the upstream enzymes in colibactin biosynthesis. n = 3 biological replicates for all conditions, individual replicates shown. Empty circles are below the limit of quantitation for this protocol (4 nM). ****P < 0.0001; *P < 0.05; NS, P > 0.05; one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test.Source data Compound 3 is selective for ClbP inhibition and active in a community setting. a, LC–MS measurement of N-myristoyl-d-Asn released from BWpks after treatment with 3 or 5. n = 3 biological replicates, individual replicates shown. b, Volcano plot representation of metabolites detected by LC–MS that are altered in BWpks treated with 1 µM of compound 3 versus untreated (left) and BWΔP versus BWpks (right). Previously characterized colibactin precursor metabolites are labeled with their m/z. n = 5 biological replicates for all conditions. c, Gel-based ABPP using a FP-biotin probe to examine the reactivity of serine hydrolases in E. coli and HEK293T cell lysates does not identify any major targets of compound 3. ClbP is not detected in this assay because of a lack of interaction between it and FP. d, LC–MS measurement of the prodrug scaffold in extracts of E. coli NC101 and E. coli NC101ΔclbP cultured with and without compound 3 and with or without a community of organisms resuspended from fecal pellets of C57BL/6J mice. The levels of prodrug scaffold observed in conditions 3 and 4 are expected as a side product from the upstream enzymes in colibactin biosynthesis. n = 3 biological replicates for all conditions, individual replicates shown. Empty circles are below the limit of quantitation for this protocol (4 nM). ****P < 0.0001; *P < 0.05; NS, P > 0.05; one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test. Source data We next used metabolomics to investigate whether treatment with 3 could elicit the same metabolic changes in E. coli as a clbP genetic knockout. An ideal chemical probe should block colibactin biosynthesis while minimally disrupting other metabolic functions, leading to an accumulation of the same shunt metabolites that have previously been observed in pks+ ΔclbP mutant strains. We compared the metabolites produced by BWpks with the metabolites produced by an isogenic ΔclbP mutant (E. coli BW25113 BACpksΔclbP, ‘BWΔP’) using LC–MS (Fig. 4b)39. We conducted the same experiment comparing BWpks treated with 1 µM 3 versus the DMSO-treated culture (Fig. 4b). The inhibitor-treated wild-type strain displayed similar changes in metabolite abundance as the ΔclbP mutant. The primary features identified in both cases were decreased levels of the prodrug scaffold (observed 343.2609 [M+H], theoretical 343.2591 [M+H] mass-to-charge ratio (m/z)) relative to the DMSO-treated wild-type and an accumulation of known shunt metabolites from colibactin biosynthesis (precolibactins m/z 414.3004, m/z 442.3344 and m/z 713.3699)6–8. One other significant feature, an increase of a metabolite at m/z 164.1055, was observed only in the case of inhibitor treatment and is consistent with the mass of phenylbutanamide (theoretical 164.1070 [M+H] m/z), a likely degradation product of 3. Based on these observations, 3 appears to be sufficiently potent and specific to serve as a tool for precise control of ClbP activity in living organisms. To explore other possible targets of inhibitors 1–4, we used an activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) approach to broadly assay their activity against serine hydrolases in bacterial and mammalian proteomes. In this gel-based assay, the binding of a small molecule to a target protein is detected as a decrease in that protein’s ability to bind a nonspecific fluorophosphonate (FP) probe compound which irreversibly inhibits a wide variety of serine hydrolases40. We observed no visible changes in protein labeling by FP at inhibitor concentrations of up to 100 µM in either E. coli or HEK293T cell lysates (Fig. 4c and Extended Data Fig. 3). One limitation of this assay is that ClbP is not labeled by the FP probe, so we cannot observe it as a reference for binding. However, this type of assay has been widely used to study the specificity of small molecule–protein binding interactions and provides strong evidence that most serine hydrolases do not bind inhibitors 1–441. To further assess the specificity of our inhibitors, we used another ABPP assay in which we replaced the broad-spectrum FP probe with a probe that specifically targets penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), BOCILLIN-FL. We chose this probe because of ClbP’s homology to AmpC β-lactamases13. Because β-lactamases and PBPs both recognize and bind β-lactams, we reasoned that these enzymes are more likely to be secondary targets of our inhibitors. Although this labeling strategy detected several PBPs in various bacterial lysates, inhibitor 3 did not reduce the labeling of any targets (Extended Data Fig. 4). This suggests that the acyl-d-asparagine recognition motif is highly specific to ClbP and its closest homologs. Compound 3 inhibits colibactin-associated genotoxicity Because colibactin is produced in the context of the gut microbiota, we need to understand how 3 can affect other members of this community and whether it remains an effective inhibitor under these conditions. We simulated a complex pks+ community by inoculating anaerobic liquid cultures with fecal pellets from C57BL/6J mice from the Jackson Laboratory, which do not contain colibactin-producing organisms, and adding E. coli NC101 to this community27. NC101 is a colibactin-producer isolated from a mouse gut for which an isogenic E. coli NC101ΔclbP mutant is available as a control42. We treated both the simulated pks+ and pksΔclbP gut communities with 3 or DMSO and monitored production of the colibactin prodrug scaffold in these cultures by LC–MS. Treatment with 3 fully suppressed production of the prodrug scaffold in the pks+ community to the same level as observed in the pksΔclbP community (Fig. 4d). To evaluate the effects of 3 on other members of the gut microbiota, we determined the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 1–4 against various bacterial strains from common gut phyla, including E. coli (Supplementary Table 3). In all cases, MICs were above the upper limit tested in this assay (200 µM), although some species showed partial growth inhibition at 200 µM (Extended Data Fig. 5). The maximum concentration tested here is more than 100-fold greater than the IC50 value for inhibition of prodrug release, suggesting that 1–4 can be used at concentrations that effectively inhibit ClbP without damaging other members of the gut microbiota. In addition to blocking the metabolic indicators of colibactin biosynthesis, we also assessed whether 3 could inhibit the genotoxic effects of colibactin on human cells. Cells exposed to colibactin exhibit cell-cycle arrest which can be quantified by DNA staining and flow cytometry4. We exposed HeLa cells to NC101 (ref. 15﻿]) and added 3 at varying concentrations in the infection medium. Treatment with 3 partially inhibits this effect at 100 nM (Fig. 5a), with complete inhibition at 1 µM. We also confirmed that 3 is not cytotoxic to human cell lines at all concentrations tested (≤10 µM, Extended Data Fig. 6).Fig. 5Compound 3 prevents colibactin-induced genotoxicity in human cells.a, Flow cytometry analysis of HeLa cells infected with NC101 and treated with 3. Cells were fixed in ethanol before staining with propidium iodide (PI) for DNA content. The increase in the population fraction with >2n DNA content indicates cell-cycle arrest. Top: raw histograms for PI fluorescence intensity in the population for one representative sample for each condition. Bottom: percentage of the population in G1 phase based on fitting histograms to the Watson cell-cycle analysis model50. Black symbols are individual replicates, bars show average value. All conditions were run in three biological replicates. Shading indicates the concentration of inhibitor. Gating strategy for flow cytometry is shown in Extended Data Fig. 7. b, Structure of two diastereomeric DNA adducts known to be derived from colibactin11. LC–MS detection of these adducts (M+H+ = m/z 540.1772) in hydrolyzed genomic DNA extracted from HeLa cells infected with NC101, three biological replicates are shown. Empty circles indicate sample was below the detection limit. For a and b ****P < 0.0001; *P < 0.05; NS, P > 0.05; one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparison test. c, Western blot for FANCD2 in HeLa cell extracts. All conditions were run in three biological replicates with one representative sample shown.Source data Fig. 5Compound 3 prevents colibactin-induced genotoxicity in human cells.a, Flow cytometry analysis of HeLa cells infected with NC101 and treated with 3. Cells were fixed in ethanol before staining with propidium iodide (PI) for DNA content. The increase in the population fraction with >2n DNA content indicates cell-cycle arrest. Top: raw histograms for PI fluorescence intensity in the population for one representative sample for each condition. Bottom: percentage of the population in G1 phase based on fitting histograms to the Watson cell-cycle analysis model50. Black symbols are individual replicates, bars show average value. All conditions were run in three biological replicates. Shading indicates the concentration of inhibitor. Gating strategy for flow cytometry is shown in Extended Data Fig. 7. b, Structure of two diastereomeric DNA adducts known to be derived from colibactin11. LC–MS detection of these adducts (M+H+ = m/z 540.1772) in hydrolyzed genomic DNA extracted from HeLa cells infected with NC101, three biological replicates are shown. Empty circles indicate sample was below the detection limit. For a and b ****P < 0.0001; *P < 0.05; NS, P > 0.05; one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparison test. c, Western blot for FANCD2 in HeLa cell extracts. All conditions were run in three biological replicates with one representative sample shown.Source data Compound 3 prevents colibactin-induced genotoxicity in human cells. a, Flow cytometry analysis of HeLa cells infected with NC101 and treated with 3. Cells were fixed in ethanol before staining with propidium iodide (PI) for DNA content. The increase in the population fraction with >2n DNA content indicates cell-cycle arrest. Top: raw histograms for PI fluorescence intensity in the population for one representative sample for each condition. Bottom: percentage of the population in G1 phase based on fitting histograms to the Watson cell-cycle analysis model50. Black symbols are individual replicates, bars show average value. All conditions were run in three biological replicates. Shading indicates the concentration of inhibitor. Gating strategy for flow cytometry is shown in Extended Data Fig. 7. b, Structure of two diastereomeric DNA adducts known to be derived from colibactin11. LC–MS detection of these adducts (M+H+ = m/z 540.1772) in hydrolyzed genomic DNA extracted from HeLa cells infected with NC101, three biological replicates are shown. Empty circles indicate sample was below the detection limit. For a and b ****P < 0.0001; *P < 0.05; NS, P > 0.05; one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s multiple comparison test. c, Western blot for FANCD2 in HeLa cell extracts. All conditions were run in three biological replicates with one representative sample shown. Source data To directly assess the impacts of 3 on colibactin’s DNA alkylating activity, we infected HeLa cells with NC101 with or without 3 added and isolated their genomic DNA. This DNA was hydrolyzed and analyzed by LC–MS to detect two diastereomeric colibactin-derived DNA adducts (Fig. 5b)11. Treatment with 1 µM 3 suppressed adduct formation similarly to genetic deletion of clbP. Finally, we assessed the impact of 3 on the response to colibactin-mediated DNA damage in HeLa cells. In response to stalled replication forks caused by DNA crosslinks, the protein FANCD2 is monoubiquitinated (FANCD2-Ub)43, and cell lines missing FANCD2 show increased sensitivity to colibactin12. Using a western blot, we detected an increase in abundance of FANCD2-Ub in HeLa cells in response to exposure to NC101, as well as in response to the DNA crosslinking agents mitomycin C (MMC) and cisplatin (Fig. 5c). Treatment of cells with 1 µM 3 prevented FANCD2 ubiquitination in cells exposed to colibactin but not MMC or cisplatin, indicating that 3 is specific to the colibactin biosynthetic pathway and does not inhibit the DNA damage response. Thus, compound 3 is not only an inhibitor of ClbP, but a potent and specific inhibitor of colibactin’s genotoxicity. Compound 3 is a tool for natural product characterization Finally, we explored the generality of this approach for controlling biosynthetic pathways by inhibiting other prodrug-activating peptidases (Fig. 6). Because compounds 1–4 exploit ClbP’s unusual N-acyl-d-asparagine recognition motif, we expected them to also inhibit ClbP’s closest relatives which hydrolyze similar substrates. Although no ClbP homologs have been annotated outside of the pks gene cluster in organisms from the human gut microbiota, they are widely distributed in biosynthetic gene clusters from environmental bacteria38. As genetic deletion of clbP causes an accumulation of upstream biosynthetic intermediates and shunt products, characterization of which was key to the structural elucidation of colibactin6–8, we reasoned that 3 could be used in a similar fashion to identify other natural products biosynthesized using an N-acyl-d-asparagine-mediated prodrug activation step. This could accelerate the discovery and structural characterization of such targets without the need to develop new genetic tools in each host organism which encodes a ClbP homolog.Fig. 6Compound 3 can be used to manipulate other natural product biosynthesis pathways.a,c, Comparative metabolomic analysis of culture supernatants of (a) B. cereus UW85 and (c) B. formosus ATCC 51669 treated with inhibitor 3 versus untreated. Inhibitor treatment leads to a decrease in production of zwittermicin or edeines, respectively, with an accumulation of precursor metabolites in both cases. Selected mass features associated with each natural product are highlighted in orange. Significance calculated using one-sided Student’s t-test. b,d, Schemes for the reported and proposed prodrug activation steps in (b) zwittermicin and (d) edeine A1 biosynthesis, respectively, which are consistent with the observed metabolomic shifts. A complete list of the mass features identified in the experiment with B. cereus UW85 showing significant changes can be found in Supplementary Table 4, and those from B. formosus ATCC 51669 can be found in Supplementary Table 5. Fig. 6Compound 3 can be used to manipulate other natural product biosynthesis pathways.a,c, Comparative metabolomic analysis of culture supernatants of (a) B. cereus UW85 and (c) B. formosus ATCC 51669 treated with inhibitor 3 versus untreated. Inhibitor treatment leads to a decrease in production of zwittermicin or edeines, respectively, with an accumulation of precursor metabolites in both cases. Selected mass features associated with each natural product are highlighted in orange. Significance calculated using one-sided Student’s t-test. b,d, Schemes for the reported and proposed prodrug activation steps in (b) zwittermicin and (d) edeine A1 biosynthesis, respectively, which are consistent with the observed metabolomic shifts. A complete list of the mass features identified in the experiment with B. cereus UW85 showing significant changes can be found in Supplementary Table 4, and those from B. formosus ATCC 51669 can be found in Supplementary Table 5. Compound 3 can be used to manipulate other natural product biosynthesis pathways. a,c, Comparative metabolomic analysis of culture supernatants of (a) B. cereus UW85 and (c) B. formosus ATCC 51669 treated with inhibitor 3 versus untreated. Inhibitor treatment leads to a decrease in production of zwittermicin or edeines, respectively, with an accumulation of precursor metabolites in both cases. Selected mass features associated with each natural product are highlighted in orange. Significance calculated using one-sided Student’s t-test. b,d, Schemes for the reported and proposed prodrug activation steps in (b) zwittermicin and (d) edeine A1 biosynthesis, respectively, which are consistent with the observed metabolomic shifts. A complete list of the mass features identified in the experiment with B. cereus UW85 showing significant changes can be found in Supplementary Table 4, and those from B. formosus ATCC 51669 can be found in Supplementary Table 5. We first tested this approach by targeting ZmaM, a ClbP homolog that is proposed to activate the antibiotic zwittermicin44. Though zwittermicin biosynthesis was the first pathway proposed to use this type of prodrug mechanism, the precursor prezwittermicin has not yet been identified. As expected, 1–4 inhibit purified ZmaM with similar potency to ClbP in vitro (Extended Data Fig. 8). We compared the metabolite profiles of untreated cultures of the zwittermicin producer Bacillus cereus UW85 and cultures exposed to 3 using LC–MS. Treatment with 3 caused an accumulation of a species whose mass is consistent with the proposed structure of prezwittermicin (observed 693.4136, theoretical 693.4141 [M+H] m/z, Fig. 6a). In addition, masses consistent with both free zwittermicin (observed 397.2046, theoretical 397.2041 [M+H] m/z) and a free N-lauroyl-d-asparagine (observed 315.2279, theoretical 315.2278 [M+H] m/z) were depleted in the treated cultures (Fig. 6a). MS/MS fragmentation patterns of these ions and their counterparts from cultures fed 13C4-asparagine support these structural assignments (Fig. 6c and Extended Data Fig. 9). The successful detection of prezwittermicin highlights the capabilities of an inhibitor-guided discovery approach. We then applied this strategy to study edeines, a family of natural products whose biosynthetic gene cluster encodes a ClbP homolog, but whose production has never been reported to involve a prodrug resistance mechanism38,45. We treated the edeine producer Brevibacillus formosus ATCC 51669 with 3 and observed a depletion of several masses corresponding to edeines, as well as masses consistent with both N-lauroyl- and N-myristoyl-d-asparagine (Fig. 6b). There are currently four known members of the edeine family (A, B, D and F), each of which has two naturally occurring structural isomers (1 or 2)45. Focusing on edeine A, treatment with 3 resulted in accumulation of a mass consistent with a larger premetabolite incorporating the N-myristoyl-d-asparagine motif (observed 1155.5952, theoretical 1155.5940 [M+2K-H] m/z, Fig. 6b). Employing the same 13C4-asparagine labeling and MS/MS fragmentation strategy, we observed +4 m/z shifts in the mass corresponding to this putative premetabolite, as well as consistent with N-lauroyl- and N-myristoyl-d-asparagine (Fig. 6d and Extended Data Fig. 9). Based on this, we propose that edeine biosynthesis uses a prodrug activation strategy and that the larger mass discovered after treatment with 3 represents a newly discovered ‘preedeine’. The greater number of metabolites that change in abundance after treatment with 3 in B. formosus compared with B. cereus likely reflects the known structural diversity of edeines. Further adding to this complexity, bioinformatic analyses reported in an accompanying paper identified a gene encoding a second ClbP homolog in B. formosus (locus tag BP422_09930 in the CP018145.1 genome), suggesting that it produces another family of uncharacterized natural products using a similar prodrug resistance strategy38. It is likely that some of the mass shifts that we observed can be attributed to this cryptic biosynthetic gene cluster. Together, these experiments demonstrate that compound 3 can be used as a tool to discover and study other natural products from diverse environmental microbes.