Results The ClbP TMD extends the substrate-binding cleft To better understand the role of the ClbP TMD in enzymatic function, we determined the crystal structure of full-length ClbP embedded in a lipid mesophase. Seeking structures in the presence of substrate analogs, we initially focused on the catalytically inactive S95A variant19. Early S95A crystals yielded electron density maps that clearly showed the position of individual transmembrane helices, although their resolution was insufficient to assign the registry or helix connectivity pattern. To overcome this challenge, we mutated non-conserved TMD positions to methionine—L454M and I478M—and used anomalous diffraction data from selenomethionine-substituted crystals to locate these sequence markers in electron density maps. We obtained two high-resolution structures of S95A-L454M-I478M: selenomethionine-substituted ClbP and methionine-containing ClbP bound to a product analog (Supplementary Table 1). The resulting high-quality maps allowed us to fully model the TMD helices and unambiguously assign their registry (Supplementary Fig. 1a,b). The two structures are nearly identical (root mean squared deviation (RMSD) = 0.15 Å over the Cα carbons of residues 38–414 and 431–491), except for the extent to which the TMD’s intracellular loops are modeled; we base our analysis below on the higher-resolution product-bound structure. Our structure of wild-type ClbP presented in an accompanying paper22 has an overall RMSD of 0.35 Å and 0.37 Å in the TMD (residues 382–409 and 431–491) to the unbound and product-bound structures, respectively, confirming that the introduced mutations do not affect the structure (Supplementary Fig. 1c). In full-length ClbP, the interaction between the periplasmic and transmembrane domains extends the substrate-binding surface and orients the catalytic residues toward the cell membrane. The periplasmic domain sits atop the TMD, with most of its structure virtually identical to the previous isolated domain structure (RMSD 0.33 Å over 288 Cα atoms; Supplementary Fig. 1d). The TMD connects to the periplasmic domain through an 11-residue loop and consists of a three-helix bundle with TM3 in the center interacting with both TM1 and TM2 and no contacts between TM1 and TM2 (Fig. 1b). The periplasmic TM2–TM3 linker includes a two-turn helix that sits underneath the catalytic residues, whereas the cytoplasmic TM1–TM2 linker is disordered and unresolved in our structures. F462 and W466 in the TM2–TM3 linker protrude toward the catalytic residues (Fig. 1b), forming an extended substrate-binding cleft as detailed below. The β3-β4 loop in the periplasmic domain (residues 218–254) appears to dip into the membrane to interact with the TMD and is the only region that is different in the isolated periplasmic domain structure (Supplementary Fig. 1d). The interactions of the β3-β4 loop with the TMD likely help orient the catalytic site toward the cell membrane, where precolibactin is presumably anchored by its two myristoyl chains. Specifically, K240 interacts with and satisfies the C-terminal negative dipole of the TM2–TM3 linker helix, an interaction that may be particularly important in the hydrophobic membrane environment. F243 also contributes to this clasp, forming non-polar contacts with residues in TM1 (Fig. 1b). To investigate the sequence conservation of positions across the interdomain interface among candidate prodrug-activating peptidases, we searched the UniProt database for members of the PF00144 (β-lactamase) superfamily that had at least two transmembrane helices and were 400–1,200 amino acids in length, consistent with similarity to either ClbP or the related prodrug-activating peptidase ZmaM (which contains an ABC half-transporter domain fused C-terminal to the ClbP-like peptidase). We built sequence similarity networks (SSNs) from protein sequences encoded by genes for which a genomic neighborhood of at least ten genes in either direction was available, using representative nodes at 100% identity to eliminate identical sequences and an expectation value cutoff of 1 × 10−90. Based on the genomic neighborhoods, we identified four clusters within the SSN containing ClbP homologs from amicoumacin23, colibactin1,6,7, edeine24, paenilamicin25, xenocoumacin26 and zwittermicin27 biosynthetic gene clusters (Supplementary Fig. 2 and Extended Data Fig. 1a,b). These homologs are mostly in Firmicutes but also in Proteobacteria (Extended Data Fig. 1c), and their length is either ClbP-like (~450 amino acids) or ZmaM-like (~1,100 amino acids) (Extended Data Fig. 1d). These analyses also suggest that several Gram-positive Paenibacillus strains produce a compound highly similar to colibactin and that edeine biosynthesis employs an N-acyl-d-asparagine prodrug peptidase mechanism. This hypothesis is validated in an accompanying paper, in which a ClbP inhibitor stimulates accumulation of newly identified preedeines in a Brevibacillus strain22. Other SSN clusters were not part of gene clusters encoding NRPS machinery (Extended Data Fig. 1b) and are, therefore, unlikely to be involved in prodrug biosynthesis systems. We excluded sequences from these clusters from further analyses. In our alignment of 271 prodrug-activating peptidases, seven TMD residues are highly conserved (Extended Data Fig. 1e). First, the two TM2–TM3 linker residues facing the catalytic site are conserved—W466 is strictly conserved, whereas neighboring F462 varies more, with substitutions to other hydrophobic residues and serine or threonine. W460 in the TM2–TM3 linker is the only other strictly conserved TMD residue. Its sidechain is wedged between TM2 and TM3 under the TM2–TM3 linker helix, with its indole amine group hydrogen-bonding to the L447 backbone carbonyl, buttressing a kink in TM2 at a conserved proline, P451 (Fig. 1b). Another conserved proline, P468, bridges the linker helix and TM3. The last two conserved TMD residues stabilize the interdomain interface: D381 caps the N-termini of helix α11 and TM1 (Fig. 1b), and D387 in TM1 hydrogen-bonds with two backbone amides of the β3-β4 loop hairpin turn (Fig. 1b). Two periplasmic domain residues noted above as playing a role in the interdomain interface are also highly conserved: K240 in the β3-β4 loop is largely conserved as a lysine, although it is sometimes substituted to other polar residues, and F243 is conserved as a large hydrophobic residue (Extended Data Fig. 1e). Overall, the conservation patterns suggest a stable relative orientation of the two domains and an important role for the extended substrate-binding cleft at the interdomain interface in all prodrug-activating peptidases. The prodrug motif binds at the interdomain interface We determined the structure of catalytically inactive ClbP with a bound substrate analog containing the N-acyl-d-asparagine prodrug motif. Because molecules containing the myristoyl substituent found in precolibactin are poorly soluble, we used an analog that replaces the myristoyl chain with a 4-phenylbutyryl group (compound 1, N-4-(4-bromophenyl)butanoyl-d-asparaginyl-l-alanine methyl ester; Fig. 2a), which is more soluble and is processed as effectively as myristoylated analogs20. We introduced a bromine substituent at the para position of the phenyl ring as an anomalous scatterer to validate the presence of the substrate analog in the electron density maps and aid in model building. We initially crystallized S95A-L454M-I478M in a precipitant solution supplemented with compound 1 and obtained a 2.7-Å structure that suggested that monoolein, the crystallization lipid, was bound at the active site (Extended Data Fig. 2a). In our model, the headgroup of monoolein forms polar interactions with active site residues S188 and H257. The chemical similarity to myristoyl-d-asparagine suggests that monoolein acts as a substrate mimic (Extended Data Fig. 2b). After supplementing compound 1 in both the protein–lipid bolus and the precipitant, we obtained high-resolution electron density maps consistent with the presence of the hydrolysis product of the analog in the active site and an intact substrate molecule in an adjacent site (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 2c,d). We validated the presence of this hydrolysis product in the active site using anomalous difference Fourier maps calculated from diffraction data collected at the bromine absorption edge (Fig. 2b).Fig. 2The prodrug motif binds at the interface between periplasmic and transmembrane domains.a, Substrate analog included in crystallization of catalytically inactive ClbP. Our data suggest that this molecule is hydrolyzed during crystallization, as the atoms in gray are not observed in the electron density map. b, Two views, related by a 90° rotation, of the hydrolysis product bound at the active site. The d-asparagine sidechain of the prodrug motif interacts with periplasmic domain residues S188, H257 and N331, and the acyl chain interacts with TM2–TM3 linker residues F462 and W466 (sidechains shown as sticks). Polder map omitting the product contoured at 7σ is colored in cyan, and bromine anomalous difference Fourier map contoured at 3.5σ is colored in purple. c, Enzymatic activity of purified ClbP variants measured as cleavage of a fluorogenic substrate analog (Extended Data Fig. 3c). The plot represents triplicate measurements normalized to the average for wild-type (WT) ClbP.Source data Fig. 2The prodrug motif binds at the interface between periplasmic and transmembrane domains.a, Substrate analog included in crystallization of catalytically inactive ClbP. Our data suggest that this molecule is hydrolyzed during crystallization, as the atoms in gray are not observed in the electron density map. b, Two views, related by a 90° rotation, of the hydrolysis product bound at the active site. The d-asparagine sidechain of the prodrug motif interacts with periplasmic domain residues S188, H257 and N331, and the acyl chain interacts with TM2–TM3 linker residues F462 and W466 (sidechains shown as sticks). Polder map omitting the product contoured at 7σ is colored in cyan, and bromine anomalous difference Fourier map contoured at 3.5σ is colored in purple. c, Enzymatic activity of purified ClbP variants measured as cleavage of a fluorogenic substrate analog (Extended Data Fig. 3c). The plot represents triplicate measurements normalized to the average for wild-type (WT) ClbP.Source data The prodrug motif binds at the interface between periplasmic and transmembrane domains. a, Substrate analog included in crystallization of catalytically inactive ClbP. Our data suggest that this molecule is hydrolyzed during crystallization, as the atoms in gray are not observed in the electron density map. b, Two views, related by a 90° rotation, of the hydrolysis product bound at the active site. The d-asparagine sidechain of the prodrug motif interacts with periplasmic domain residues S188, H257 and N331, and the acyl chain interacts with TM2–TM3 linker residues F462 and W466 (sidechains shown as sticks). Polder map omitting the product contoured at 7σ is colored in cyan, and bromine anomalous difference Fourier map contoured at 3.5σ is colored in purple. c, Enzymatic activity of purified ClbP variants measured as cleavage of a fluorogenic substrate analog (Extended Data Fig. 3c). The plot represents triplicate measurements normalized to the average for wild-type (WT) ClbP. Source data The carboxylate of the hydrolysis product, which corresponds to the scissile bond of the substrate, is next to A95 with an oxygen atom hydrogen-bonding with catalytic triad residues K98 and Y186 (2.8 Å and 2.4 Å respectively; Extended Data Fig. 2b). The N-terminal hydrophobic group of the product contacts TMD residues F462 and W466, further supporting their role in binding the acyl chain of the prodrug motif (Fig. 2b). The longer native myristoyl group could extend along the transmembrane helices of ClbP and reach the membrane lipids, suggesting that precolibactin can reach the ClbP active site by diffusion while embedded in the inner membrane’s outer leaflet. The d-asparagine sidechain crucial for substrate recognition by ClbP interacts with periplasmic domain residues S188, H257 and N331. The d-asparagine sidechain carbonyl hydrogen-bonds with S188 and H257, whereas its sidechain amino group hydrogen-bonds with the N331 sidechain carbonyl (Fig. 2b). The orientation of the N331 sidechain amide is itself set by a hydrogen bond between its amino group and E92, which is, in turn, stabilized by a salt bridge with K235. Although N331 is strictly conserved among putative prodrug-activating peptidases, it is not conserved among the wider S12 family, suggesting that this position is important for d-asparagine binding in the xenocoumacin, amicoumacin, zwittermicin, paenilamicin and edeine peptidases (Extended Data Fig. 3a). Similarly, position 188 is conserved as a serine or threonine in prodrug-activating peptidases, and position 257 is a histidine or an asparagine. In contrast, position 188 is highly conserved as an asparagine among the broader S12 family, whereas H257 is not conserved. The high conservation of the d-asparagine-binding residues specifically among prodrug-activating peptidases supports an important role for these residues in substrate specificity. N331 and W466 are essential for prodrug cleavage We explored the role of interactions between the prodrug motif and its binding site on ClbP’s enzymatic function by measuring cleavage of a fluorogenic substrate analog by purified ClbP variants (Extended Data Fig. 3b,c)20. TM2–TM3 linker mutation F462A did not affect enzyme activity, whereas the W466A mutation completely abrogated activity, demonstrating that W466 is essential for peptidase activity in vitro (Fig. 2c). Mutating d-asparagine-binding residue N331 to alanine also abolished ClbP activity. Similarly, mutating S188 to alanine severely impaired activity. Thus, the hydrogen bonds of these two highly conserved residues to d-asparagine are critical for robust peptidase activity (Fig. 2c). The activity of H257A was similar to wild-type, suggesting that the interaction mediated by this residue is not required for peptidase activity (Fig. 2c). Finally, we examined whether residues at the interdomain interface but not directly involved in substrate binding have a role in enzyme activity. Substitutions F243A in the β3-β4 loop and W460A in the TM2-TM3 linker had no effect, whereas K240A severely reduced activity (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Its consistently lower expression levels and purification yields suggest that K240A impairs activity by disrupting protein stability rather than directly affecting substrate binding or catalysis. These results support an important role for the interactions of K240 and the TM2–TM3 helix—and by extension, interdomain interactions—in ClbP protein stability. N331 enforces d-asparagine specificity We hypothesized that N331 enforces the specificity of ClbP for substrates with d-asparagine prodrug motifs and that its sidechain orientation, set by a hydrogen bond with E92 to present a hydrogen bond-accepting carbonyl to the substrate, is responsible for excluding d-aspartate analogs, which are cleaved at marginal rates by ClbP (ref. 20). To test this hypothesis, we perturbed the interaction network determining the N331 orientation (Fig. 3a) by mutating E92 to glutamine. We compared the hydrolase activity of wild-type and E92Q toward substrates with d-asparagine and d-aspartate prodrug motifs using a liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS) assay (Fig. 3b)20. This mutation indeed broadened substrate specificity: E92Q had wild-type-like activity for the d-asparagine substrate, and it also processed the d-aspartate substrate effectively, whereas wild-type ClbP did not (Fig. 3c). In contrast, S188A, H257A and N331A did not cleave substantial amounts of the d-aspartate substrate, and their behavior toward the d-asparagine substrate recapitulated the results from our fluorogenic assay (Fig. 3c). This suggests that E92, highly conserved among prodrug-activating peptidases but not across the S12 family (Extended Data Fig. 4a), orients hydrogen-bonding groups in the substrate-binding pocket of ClbP and other prodrug-activating peptidases to provide selectivity toward d-asparagine-containing substrates.Fig. 3N331 enforces d-asparagine specificity.a, A network of interactions initiated by K235 orients N331 such that the carbonyl in its sidechain faces toward the binding pocket (the cartoon representation of residues 255–261 is transparent to optimize the view). b, Activity assay with substrate analogs containing prodrug motifs with alternative d-amino acids. Cleaved prodrug motif is detected by LC–MS (normalized to AUC of S95A) after a 5-hour incubation of the substrate with purified ClbP variants. c, Results of the assay in b for the substrate analogs containing d-Asn (left) or d-Asp (right); n = 3 independent experiments. None of the ClbP variants cleaved substantial amounts of the d-Gln-containing substrate analog (Extended Data Fig. 4d). Perturbing the orientation of the N331 sidechain allows ClbP to cleave d-aspartate substrates, suggesting that this residue is crucial for substrate specificity. Representative traces from the LC–MS are shown in Extended Data Fig. 4c. WT, wild-type.Source data Fig. 3N331 enforces d-asparagine specificity.a, A network of interactions initiated by K235 orients N331 such that the carbonyl in its sidechain faces toward the binding pocket (the cartoon representation of residues 255–261 is transparent to optimize the view). b, Activity assay with substrate analogs containing prodrug motifs with alternative d-amino acids. Cleaved prodrug motif is detected by LC–MS (normalized to AUC of S95A) after a 5-hour incubation of the substrate with purified ClbP variants. c, Results of the assay in b for the substrate analogs containing d-Asn (left) or d-Asp (right); n = 3 independent experiments. None of the ClbP variants cleaved substantial amounts of the d-Gln-containing substrate analog (Extended Data Fig. 4d). Perturbing the orientation of the N331 sidechain allows ClbP to cleave d-aspartate substrates, suggesting that this residue is crucial for substrate specificity. Representative traces from the LC–MS are shown in Extended Data Fig. 4c. WT, wild-type.Source data N331 enforces d-asparagine specificity. a, A network of interactions initiated by K235 orients N331 such that the carbonyl in its sidechain faces toward the binding pocket (the cartoon representation of residues 255–261 is transparent to optimize the view). b, Activity assay with substrate analogs containing prodrug motifs with alternative d-amino acids. Cleaved prodrug motif is detected by LC–MS (normalized to AUC of S95A) after a 5-hour incubation of the substrate with purified ClbP variants. c, Results of the assay in b for the substrate analogs containing d-Asn (left) or d-Asp (right); n = 3 independent experiments. None of the ClbP variants cleaved substantial amounts of the d-Gln-containing substrate analog (Extended Data Fig. 4d). Perturbing the orientation of the N331 sidechain allows ClbP to cleave d-aspartate substrates, suggesting that this residue is crucial for substrate specificity. Representative traces from the LC–MS are shown in Extended Data Fig. 4c. WT, wild-type. Source data Because mutations at position 188 were implicated in changes to substrate specificity in AmpC (ref. 28), we explored the effect of restoring the S12 family consensus asparagine on the specificity of ClbP. S188N still cleaved the d-asparagine substrate but did not process d-aspartate and d-glutamine substrates (Fig. 3c and Extended Data Fig. 4b), indicating that this mutation does not broaden the specificity of ClbP. Activity of S188N for the d-asparagine substrate was lower than wild-type but higher than S188A, suggesting that an asparagine at this position can be a hydrogen-bond donor to the substrate, although the geometry enforced in the bound substrate may not be optimal for catalysis. ClbP forms a dimer The crystal-packing interactions in our structure include a two-fold symmetric dimer interface that is also present in the structure of the isolated periplasmic domain19, which had not been previously described (Fig. 4a). Because the two structures result from different crystal-packing arrangements (Extended Data Fig. 5a,b), we hypothesized that this dimer interface is physiological and that ClbP dimerizes in cells. This hypothesis is particularly relevant in the context of the recently proposed pseudodimeric structure of precolibactin9,10. The two ClbP subunits form a dome-shaped canopy over the cell membrane that subtends a largely electronegative surface, which is flanked by the two active sites 35.5 Å apart (distance between S95 γO atoms). The dimer interface in our crystal lattice is centered around a crystallographic two-fold axis and exclusively consists of interactions between periplasmic domains, with two pairs of interlocking loops contributing both polar and hydrophobic contacts (Fig. 4b and Extended Data Fig. 5c). The interface buries 1,285 Å2 of surface area per subunit. Several buried polar interactions are predicted as the largest energetic contributors stabilizing this assembly29, including those mediated by R308, namely a salt bridge with D367 and a cation–π interaction with Y324 and a salt bridge between K374 and D300 (Fig. 4c,d).Fig. 4ClbP forms a dimer that accommodates pseudodimeric precolibactin.a, ClbP dimer observed in the crystal-packing interactions from a plane perpendicular to the cell membrane, denoted as black lines. b, Orthogonal view of the dimer interface looking from the periplasm to the inside of the cell. The interface forms around a two-fold crystallographic symmetry axis (black oval) and consists of a pair of interlocking loops that contribute both hydrophobic and polar interactions. The largest predicted energetic contributors to stabilizing this interface are interactions formed among residues R308, Y324 and D367 (shown as thick sticks). All other residues participating in the interface are shown as thin sticks. c,d, Detailed view of interactions mediated by R308 (c) and K374 (d). e, 3D reconstruction obtained from cryo-EM analysis of wild-type ClbP. Density colored to correspond to each subunit, and the detergent micelle is shown as a transparent surface with dust hidden for clarity. f,g, Model of precolibactin binding to the ClbP dimer obtained by individually docking fragments of the molecule (Supplementary Fig. 5). Precolibactin can straddle both subunits of the ClbP dimer such that the prodrug motifs at both ends can each bind a different active site simultaneously. Views of precolibactin binding to the dimer as seen from a plane perpendicular to the membrane (f) as well as to the surface of the cavity subtended by the dimer (g). Note that the docked molecule contains hexanoyl chains in place of the natural tetradecanoyl (or ‘C14’) chains of the myristoyl groups. Fig. 4ClbP forms a dimer that accommodates pseudodimeric precolibactin.a, ClbP dimer observed in the crystal-packing interactions from a plane perpendicular to the cell membrane, denoted as black lines. b, Orthogonal view of the dimer interface looking from the periplasm to the inside of the cell. The interface forms around a two-fold crystallographic symmetry axis (black oval) and consists of a pair of interlocking loops that contribute both hydrophobic and polar interactions. The largest predicted energetic contributors to stabilizing this interface are interactions formed among residues R308, Y324 and D367 (shown as thick sticks). All other residues participating in the interface are shown as thin sticks. c,d, Detailed view of interactions mediated by R308 (c) and K374 (d). e, 3D reconstruction obtained from cryo-EM analysis of wild-type ClbP. Density colored to correspond to each subunit, and the detergent micelle is shown as a transparent surface with dust hidden for clarity. f,g, Model of precolibactin binding to the ClbP dimer obtained by individually docking fragments of the molecule (Supplementary Fig. 5). Precolibactin can straddle both subunits of the ClbP dimer such that the prodrug motifs at both ends can each bind a different active site simultaneously. Views of precolibactin binding to the dimer as seen from a plane perpendicular to the membrane (f) as well as to the surface of the cavity subtended by the dimer (g). Note that the docked molecule contains hexanoyl chains in place of the natural tetradecanoyl (or ‘C14’) chains of the myristoyl groups. ClbP forms a dimer that accommodates pseudodimeric precolibactin. a, ClbP dimer observed in the crystal-packing interactions from a plane perpendicular to the cell membrane, denoted as black lines. b, Orthogonal view of the dimer interface looking from the periplasm to the inside of the cell. The interface forms around a two-fold crystallographic symmetry axis (black oval) and consists of a pair of interlocking loops that contribute both hydrophobic and polar interactions. The largest predicted energetic contributors to stabilizing this interface are interactions formed among residues R308, Y324 and D367 (shown as thick sticks). All other residues participating in the interface are shown as thin sticks. c,d, Detailed view of interactions mediated by R308 (c) and K374 (d). e, 3D reconstruction obtained from cryo-EM analysis of wild-type ClbP. Density colored to correspond to each subunit, and the detergent micelle is shown as a transparent surface with dust hidden for clarity. f,g, Model of precolibactin binding to the ClbP dimer obtained by individually docking fragments of the molecule (Supplementary Fig. 5). Precolibactin can straddle both subunits of the ClbP dimer such that the prodrug motifs at both ends can each bind a different active site simultaneously. Views of precolibactin binding to the dimer as seen from a plane perpendicular to the membrane (f) as well as to the surface of the cavity subtended by the dimer (g). Note that the docked molecule contains hexanoyl chains in place of the natural tetradecanoyl (or ‘C14’) chains of the myristoyl groups. To directly probe the oligomeric state of detergent-solubilized ClbP, we determined its structure by single-particle cryo-EM. The two-dimensional (2D) class averages derived from this analysis are consistent with the head-to-head dimer observed in the crystal lattice, and none suggests the presence of a monomeric species (Extended Data Fig. 6a–c). After 2D and 3D classification, we selected 109,906 particles and generated a density map with a nominal resolution of 3.73 Å (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Figs. 6d–f and 7a). The resulting dimeric ClbP structure is nearly identical to the crystallographic dimer (RMSD of 0.830 Å over 904 residues), except for a ~5° bend of each TMD toward the dimer axis (Extended Data Fig. 7b,c). We also identified a branched density in the active site of both subunits that likely corresponds to co-purified phospholipids (Extended Data Fig. 7d). Overall, our cryo-EM structure confirms that ClbP forms a stable dimer in solution through interactions matching those observed in the crystal lattice. We sought to determine the effect of dimer interface mutations R308E, D367A and K374E to the oligomeric state of ClbP by size-exclusion chromatography (SEC). None of these mutations led to the appearance of smaller species, although R308E increased the proportion of aggregates and decreased the proportion of dimers (Extended Data Fig. 8a). In an in vitro assay, these three dimer interface variants, as well as R308A and Y324A, had wild-type-like activity levels for our monomeric fluorogenic probe (Extended Data Fig. 8b,c). Because none of the tested single mutations produced observable monomeric species, we generated two constructs replacing residues 299–310 or 304–308, respectively, of the longest interface loop with a two-glycine linker. Although we could purify these constructs, SEC suggested that they form large aggregates (Extended Data Fig. 8d). Our results suggest that effective disruption of the dimerization interface destabilizes ClbP, and they point to an essential role of this interface in protein stability. The sequences of the two loops forming the ClbP dimer interface are poorly conserved among prodrug-activating peptidases at large or even among ClbP homologs encoded in other colibactin gene clusters (Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Fig. 3). To determine whether the secondary structures involved in ClbP dimerization are conserved in closely related peptidases, we built a sequence similarity tree of the S12 homologs deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) and compared our structure of ClbP to structures in the same clade. Although the interface loops are present in all the closely related structures, they vary in size and do not mediate the same protein–protein contacts found in the ClbP dimer (Extended Data Fig. 9b–d). Of note, all prodrug-activating ClbP homologs with identified substrates hydrolyze a single prodrug motif on their target substrate (Supplementary Fig. 4). These analyses suggest that dimerization through this interface is a unique and emergent feature of ClbP, which may reflect the pseudodimeric structure of its substrate. The ClbP dimer binding site can accommodate precolibactin To determine whether the substrate-binding site of ClbP can accommodate the proposed structure of precolibactin, we docked precolibactin within the ClbP dimer cavity. Considering its size and symmetry, we divided precolibactin into three overlapping fragments that should recapitulate the interactions formed by the full-length molecule while remaining tractable docking targets (Supplementary Fig. 5a). We used our inhibitor-bound structure22 as a template to dock fragments representing the two terminal prodrug motifs to the active site of each ClbP subunit. As expected, the resulting poses for these fragments recapitulate the interactions observed between ClbP and the inhibitor, with the acyl chain in the prodrug motif interacting with W466 and F462 in the TMD and the carbonyl from the scissile amide bond 3.6 Å away from the S95 γO. We then performed unrestrained docking of the central precolibactin fragment to the intersubunit interface. Out of several possible poses bridging the two subunits, we selected one in which the terminal functional groups roughly overlap with the corresponding groups in the two end fragments in their chosen poses (Supplementary Fig. 5b,c). Finally, we generated a model of precolibactin docked in the dimer cavity by manually aligning the shared groups of the separately docked fragments and performing a global minimization in the assembled precolibactin (Fig. 4e,f). Overall, our model illustrates that the ClbP dimer can accommodate the proposed full-length precolibactin structure and optimally position the two prodrug motifs for simultaneous activation.