3. Results 3.1. Bioinformatic Study 3.1.1. Search for A. fumigatus Af293 GliP Homologous Proteins in Other Species About a third of the species obtained by BLAST belong to the section Fumigati, there are two penicilliums, four trichodermas, as well as other less common species such as coleophoma or colletotrichum. NRPS with high sequence homology can be expected to be orthologous to GliP performing similar biosynthetic functions, or even the same as GliP. Assuming homology, it is also likely that the sequences and functions of the rest of the auxiliary enzymes encoded in the genes of the cluster are conserved. In this study, we have manually selected 20 NRPS from different species with a relatively high degree of similarity (query coverage > 90%, aminoacidic sequence identity > 35% and e-value = 0). As it is shown in Table 2, best BLAST results for A. fumigatus Af293 gliP gene searching against all fungi are always gliPs from other A. fumigatus strains, which validates our approach. Thus, we selected only one strain (A. fumigatus A1163) to assess variation within strains. Next highest scored BLAST results are given by other section Fumigati species such as A. fischerii, A. turcosus, A. novofumigatus, or A. lentulus among others. These NRPSs belonging to section Fumigati species are expected to be A. fumigatus GliP orthologues due to the high genetic proximity among them. It should be noted that no Aspergillus species outside section Fumigati are obtained as BLAST results, inferring that only Fumigati section species might be capable of producing GT. In fact, best BLAST outcomes for A. terreus (section Terrei) and A. flavus [70] (section Flavi) are respectively AtaP and AclP, which identity is fewer than 35% (data not shown). AtaP is known to be the NRPS of the acetylaranotin gene cluster and catalyzes the condensation of two L-Phe to form a cyclo-Phe-Phe [70]. The same frame is generated by AclP [71], a cyclo-Phe-Phe, but in this case, the rest of A. flavus GT-like cluster genes generate a different secondary metabolite known as aspirochlorine. However, out of Aspergillus section Fumigati, the sequence identity drops to 60–35%, although still conserving high percentages of covered sequence. Given that ataP and aclP paralogues have a few worse scores than lower range BLAST results and differs from GliP in one adenylation domain specificity (GliP form a cyclo-Phe-Ser), it is difficult to determine if the NRPSs not belonging to the Fumigati section keep their specificity for L-Phe and L-Ser as GliP. Supporting these results, it was previously shown that A. niger and nidulans isolates do not produce GT, and that generation of GT in other non-fumigati sections such as terreus or flavus was limited to very few isolates. Outside the section Fumigati, the three Penicillium species achieve the best identity outcomes of around 60%. Among low rated best BLAST results, it is worth to mention T. virens Gv29-8 GliP, which is known to produce GT, albeit it owns just a 44% of identity [72]. The multiple sequence alignment of the 23 NRPS performed by Clustal Omega and visualized by Jalview allows to determine the sequence fragments or amino acids conserved between all the sequences. Jalview visual analysis of the alignments shows that most conserved regions across the sequences are in the adenylation (Figure 2) domains while condensation domains exhibit less homology than the others. 3.1.2. Phylogenetic Tree The phylogenetic tree was inferred from the sequences similar to A. fumigatus Af293 GliP. The tree with the highest log likelihood (−52146.32) was selected (Figure 3). In most cases, strains belonging to the same fungal species have been grouped in the same clade. The clearest example is that of the genus Aspergillus, in the upper part of the phylogenetic tree. The bootstrap value of the clade that encompasses all the Aspergillus taxa has a bootstrap value of 100. This means that the 100 times that the tree inference algorithm has been performed, these sequences have been classified in the same clade. Therefore, the topology of this branch is highly reproducible giving a high confidence value. Similarly, the proteins that have been selected to study in the Penicillium strains have been classified in the same clade with a bootstrap value of 100. In turn, these proteins come from the same common ancestor as those of the Aspergillus genus, with a bootstrap value of 100. This result suggests high similarity between the sequences of these proteins. The branch length among A. fumigatus strains is 0, which means that there is no substitution per site from one protein to another. Between the strains of A. fumigatus and the rest of the species of the genus Aspergillus, we found small distances (0.02–0.06). On the other hand, among the Penicillium strains, the distance is slightly higher (0.1–0.2), showing more evolutionary differences between them. Besides, the length of the branch between Aspergillus and Penicillium is 0.3–0.35 substitutions per site, showing the slight differences between these proteins. Generally, the strains of the genus Trichoderma have also been grouped together with the same common ancestor, but in this case, the evolutionary distances are greater; therefore, we can deduce that these proteins present more differences between them and with respect to the Aspergillus genus. Generally, the rest of the strains belonging to the same species have also been grouped together by the algorithm, such as Colletotrichum. The bootstrap values for most of the generated clades are 100 or close to 100, demonstrating high reliability of the created tree. 3.1.3. Search for Possible Clusters of Secondary Metabolites in Various Strains Using antiSMASH NRPSs are multimodular enzymes. A. fumigatus Af293 GliP is composed of two adenylation domains, two condensation domains, and three thiolation domains showing the structure A1-T1-C1-A2-T2-C2-T3 [33]. antiSMASH analysis of the fungal NRPSs studied here reveals that most of them conserve all these domains. However, as it is represented in Figure 4, several NRPSs sequences lack one or more domains. This is the case of B. victoriae FI3 EUN32662.1, C. fructicola CGMCC3.17371, C. asianum ICMP 18580 KAE9572546.1 proteins, that according to antiSMASH, lack T3 domain which can lead to a diminished cyclization ability of the NRPS [73]. Other NRPSs such as C. cylindrospora BP6252 RDW70942 do not contain T1 and T3 domains, which could suggest absence of the function performed by these enzymes. However, PFAM analysis through antiSMASH could not recognize T1 and T3 domains in T. virens Gv29-8 EHK22005, which is known to be a functional enzyme and synthetize cyclo-Phe-Ser [72], which suggest alternative protein domains that could present a similar function. NRPS are usually included inside of a more complex gene cluster. Accompanying these NRPSs are other genes that codify enzymes that participate in the same secondary metabolite biosynthesis. In order to elucidate if selected gene clusters are capable of synthetize GT, it is necessary to identify homologs to the rest of the genes known to be involved in the synthesis. As it is shown in Figure 5, most gli clusters homologues studied here preserve the majority of those genes mentioned above. All Aspergillus section Fumigati species contain inside their gli clusters all the genes present in A. fumigatus Af 293 gli cluster, so they should be able to synthetize GT. However, A. turcosus HMR Af 1038 gli cluster lacks gliZ gene, which encodes the transcription factor that is responsible for the expression of several gli genes, suggesting that this specie would not be able to produce GT [15]. As it is shown in Table S1, there is high identity and query coverage among Fumigati section gli homologs. In case of P. flavigenum IBT 14082, most of the homologs gli genes are present within the cluster. Nevertheless, the cluster lacks gliF and gliZ and contains two N-methyltransferases (gliN). Moreover, Best Blast Hit for gliA homologue is a gene outside the cluster although an MFS is located within the cluster and there is other nearby. For P. expansum MD-8, similar results were obtained except the fact that gliZ is present and there are no two gliN homologs. As expected, lower sequence identities were obtained when Penicillium gli homologue genes are compared to A. fumigatus Af 293 gli genes. B. victoriae gli gene cluster contains all genes involved in GT biosynthesis except gliF when compared to A. fumigatus Af 293 gli cluster. The only difference is that there are two gliN genes together. It must be mentioned that other MFS outside the cluster express more homology with A. fumigatus Af 293 gliA, rather than the contained in. Something similar happens with A gene in E. ampelina homologue gene cluster. This gene cluster contains an MFS which it is not the Best Blast Hit for A. fumigatus gliA, although it retains a certain grade of homology. However, the selected gene cluster contains all genes that A. fumigatus needs to synthetize GT, and some others extra genes with an unknown role in GT synthesis which are shown in grey color in Figure 5. It must be mentioned that a few more genes are located next to the gliK gene at one end of the cluster and which have related secondary metabolism functions such as cytochromes P450 or N-methylases. As in case of E. ampelina gli-like gene cluster, C. cylindrospora BP6252 gli homologous gene cluster has all genes needed to GT biosynthesis although A and Z genes are not Best Blast Hits in C. cylindrospora genome. Colletotrichum species studied here possess shortened gli homologous gene clusters but one differs a lot from the other. C. fructicola CGMCC3.17371 gli homologous gene cluster lacks K and I genes, although a homologue of the last one resides next to a side of the gene cluster. As in other species here studied, A and Z genes are not the Best Blast Hits compared to those in A. fumigatus. C. assianum lacks most genes related to GT biosynthesis, conserving only five of those genes. It must be mentioned that from here, antiSMASH cluster prediction identifies the selected clusters as gliovirin related clusters. T virens Gv29-8, which is a known GT producer (Q strain), apparently only owns 8 of 13 genes involved in GT biosynthesis contained within the GT gene cluster. However, these gli genes are contained in a small scaffold of about 30 Kb, so the rest of the genes might be spread throughout the rest of the genome [74]. In fact, possible candidates of T. virens gliJ, gliA, and gliT are located in the small scaffolds 51, 34, and 10 which have 40, 13, and 7 Kb respectively. GliZ and gliH (hypothetical protein) presence within the genome is still unknown. As in other species here studied, T. hemipterigena BCC 1449 gli homologous gene cluster contains almost all A. fumigatus gli genes, with the exception of F gene. The T. hemipterigena BCC 1449 gene cluster also contains two MFS genes which exhibit low similarity with A. fumigatus gliA. Z and T gene are also present inside T. hemipterigena gene cluster but they are not the Best Blast Hit when compared with their A. fumigatus counterparts. T. hemipterigena gene cluster is identified as a gliovirin gene cluster homologue by antiSMASH again. The last cluster represented in the Figure 5 and belonging to P. zonata, R. lignyota, and the rest of the Trichodermas have better resemblance to the verticillin gene cluster than GT one. Except R. lignyota, all the other species contains in their clusters an A protein which codifies for an ABC transporter, not an MFS as GT-like gene clusters. Other differences lie on the presence of a kind of fusion gene composed with the Z and B gene (T. reesei, T. parareesei, T. harzianum and R. lignyota) and the presence of the L gene similar to verL (T. reesei, T. parareesei, T. harzianum) or D gene similar to aflD (aflatoxin D biosynthetic protein). In fact, P and C genes are, as a rule, the most conserved enzymes in all the species we have studied, and the intra-cluster synteny of these two genes is ultra-conserved. In all clusters, the genes are contiguous and in similar orientation. Other genes such as G and K generally occur together or very close to each other. In general, most of the functions required for GT biosynthesis are present in the gli cluster homologs studied here. 3.2. Analysis and Quantification of GT Production by Several Fungal Strains To check the validity of the in silico approach, GT and bmGT (that derives from GT dimethylation) presence in fungal cell culture supernatants from selected fungal species used in the in silico study was analyzed by HPLC. As it is shown in Table 3, GT and bmGT production was only found in section Fumigati species grown in Sabouraud and RPMI broth, except for A. lentulus and A. fischeri. Outside of the Fumigati section, only T. virens Q strain was capable to synthetize GT and bmGT. Under these conditions the rest of the species analyzed were not able to produce GT or bmGT. GT and bmGT concentrations obtained from culture supernatants ranged from 0.085 to 11.067 µg/mL and from 0.222 to 11.131 µg/mL respectively.