2. Results and Discussion 2.1. Genomic Features CCB-ST2H9 was isolated from estuarine sediment obtained from the Matang mangrove. Based on a 16S rRNA sequence similarity search performed using the EzTaxon database [27], CCB-ST2H9 is most closely related to P. halotolerans MACL01 (98.03%), P. salinisoli LAM9072 (97.65%), and P. galatheae S2753 (97.56%). These values are slightly below the species demarcation threshold of 98.7% [28]. The complete CCB-ST2H9 genome contained two chromosomes (Chr 1, 1.51 Mb; Chr 2, 1.51 Mb) and a plasmid (79.85Kb), with GC content of 50.3% (Table 1 and Figure S1). The GC content of CCB-ST2H9 was in the upper bound of Photobacterium, which varied between 38.6 and 50.9%. The CCB-ST2H9 genome falls in the Photobacterium genomes size range of 4.38 to 6.53 Mb, with the smallest genome observed for P. malacitanum CECT 9190, associated with diseased redbanded seabream, and the largest for P. alginatilyticum P03D4, isolated from a bottom seawater sample from the East China Sea [29,30]. Concomitantly, P. malacitanum and P. alginatilyticum annotated gene numbers were among the smallest and largest in Photobacterium, respectively. The CCB-ST2H9 genome has 99.2% gene space completeness following assessment with the BUSCO tool (Figure S2). Genome annotation of CCB-ST2H9 resulted in 4915 coding sequences, including 4703 protein-coding genes, 127 tRNA genes, and 37 RNA genes. A total of 3828 CCB-ST2H9 genes were assigned to 22 functional Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG) classes, with transcription, amino acid transport and metabolism, and inorganic ion transport and metabolism being the most abundant pathways (excluding the unknown function category) (Figure S3a). Gene Ontology (GO) annotation classified 3611 CCB-ST2H9 genes into three functional terms in which the top subgroups were catalytic activity, cellular process, and metabolic process (Figure S3b). From the 2610 CCB-ST2H9 genes mapped to the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), a significant proportion was involved in protein families: genetic information processing and environmental information processing, and protein families: signaling and cellular processes (Figure S3c). Genomic islands play an important role in bacterial genome evolution and adaptation as they are the probable horizontal origin of genes for pathogenicity, symbiosis, and metabolism [31]. A total of 13 genomic islands ranging in size from 10.2 to 35.8 Kb were detected in the CCB-ST2H9 genome (Table S2). The genomic islands contain a considerable number of hypothetical genes, as well as genes related to energy, cell membrane, and signal transduction (Table S3). In addition, five prophage-like elements were detected in CCB-ST2H9, one of which was classified as intact, three as incomplete, and one as questionable (Table S4). 2.2. Phylogeny of Photobacterium Although 16S rRNA phylogeny has been widely applied in species classification, the limitations of using this gene as a phylogenetic marker in Vibrionaceae have been noted previously [10,11]. Meanwhile, multigene phylogenies provide better resolution between phylogenetically close strains, and the tree topology is less affected by recombination events [32,33]. In this study, a phylogenomic analysis was performed based on the bacterial core genes from 37 Photobacterium strains, using Vibrio cholerae ATCC 14035 as an outgroup (Figure 1). This tree showed that CCB-ST2H9 clustered with P. galatheae S2753, forming a distinct clade with P. halotolerans DSM18316, P. salinisoli LAM9071, and P. arenosum CAU 1568, distant from the other Photobacterium strains. This grouping appears to be related to environmental sources. With the exception of P. arenosum from marine sediment, this clade consists of Photobacterium isolated from non-marine habitats: CCB-ST2H9 from estuarine sediment, P. halotolerans from a saline lake, and P. salinisoli from saline soil [7,34]. The remaining Photobacterium strains were grouped into the clades Damselae, Leiognathi, Ganghwense, Profundum, Phosphoreum, and Rosenbergii, consistent with prior reports [35,36]. While this clade classification can facilitate the study of large genera by grouping together lines of descent, it is not a standard in nomenclature [8]. The genome evolutionary relatedness between Photobacterium strains was depicted based on the average nucleotide identity (ANI) and digital DNA–DNA hybridization (dDDH). In agreement with phylogenomic clustering, the highest ANI was shared between CCB-ST2H9 and P. galatheae (88.95%), P. halotolerans (84.26%), P. arenosum (84.25%), and P. salinisoli (84.25%) (Figure 2). Accordingly, the highest dDDH percentage (32.7%) was between CCB-ST2H9 and P. galatheae (Table S5). Both the sharing ANI and dDDH values between CCB-ST2H9 and other Photobacterium strains were below the proposed 95–96% and 70% cut-off of bacterial species definition [37,38]. Considering the 16S rRNA sequence similarity and ANI and dDDH results, strain CCB-ST2H9 is potentially a new species of the genus Photobacterium. 2.3. Core and Pan-Genome of Photobacterium A pan-genome is comprised of core genes found in all strains, accessory genes (shell and cloud) common to two or more strains but not all, and unique genes present only in one strain. The orthologous clustering of protein-coding sequences from the 37 Photobacterium genomes analysed identified a total of 21,786 consensus gene clusters defining the pan-genome (Figure 3a). The size of the Photobacterium pan-genome would continue to expand with the increasing number of genomes incorporated in the analysis and can be considered open (Figure 3b). This pan-genomic feature is typical of taxonomic groups capable of colonizing diverse habitats and hence the opportunity to exchange genetic material with different sources [25,39]. More than half of the gene sets constituting the pan-genome (14,638 genes, 67%) belonged to the cloud cluster, whereas the shell and the soft-core clusters accounted for 26% (5587 genes) and 7% (1561 genes) of the pan-genome, respectively (Figure 3c). Both the cloud and shell clusters are subsets of the flexible genome that could be applied to infer an organism’s evolutionary trajectory and lifestyle or habitat adaptation [40]. These two clusters are hypothesized to have different rates of gene acquisition and deletion, with the cloud including rapidly gained and lost genes, and the shell containing slowly gained and lost genes [41]. The core genome presented in all examined Photobacterium strains had 894 genes, representing approximately 19% of the total genes in a genome, which indicates significant gene conservation among Photobacterium. The number of core genes decreased rapidly with the addition of genomes but stabilized after the addition of the 20th genome, suggesting that the core genome was closed (Figure 3d). In a previous Photobacterium pan-genome study, a higher number of core genes was observed, likely due to the inclusion of genomes from less diverse species in the analysis and the slightly smaller number of genomes in the dataset [10]. COG functional assignments revealed that the Photobacterium core genome was enriched in functions involving translation, coenzyme metabolism, and nucleotide metabolism and transport (Figure 4a). These core genes encode housekeeping functions related to fundamental processes in the cell that have been conserved in all species throughout evolution. In addition to translation and coenzyme metabolism, the soft-core genome was also abundant in transcription function. The abundant COG category transcription, which consists of transcriptional regulators, could enable Photobacterium to regulate metabolic processes, contributing to their adaptability to the local environment. Compared to the core genome, the Photobacterium flexible genome was well represented with functions related to energy production and conversion, cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis, and carbohydrate metabolism and transport. The flexible genome was enriched with environmental genes, such as those that allow Photobacterium to respond to environmental changes by utilising different types of carbon and energy sources for surviving under various conditions. The flexible genome contributes to functional versatility, which in turn improves the ecological success of the bacteria in diverse environmental niches. Analysis of CCB-ST2H9 specific genes revealed that only 34.8% (201 genes) were assignable to COG functions (Figure 4b). These unique genes that evolved in CCB-ST2H9 likely complement strain-specific activity via unknown mechanisms. Besides function unknown (31%), COGs associated with replication and repair, carbohydrate metabolism and transport, and cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis were most abundant among strain-specific genes. 2.4. Biosynthetic Potential of Photobacterium To examine the potential of Photobacterium strains to produce bioactive metabolites, the genomes were screened for the presence of biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) using antiSMASH software. A total of 238 BGCs were detected amongst the 37 genomes, with beta-lactone (35), ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptide (RiPP)-like (33), and non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) (30) being the most prevalent (Figure 5). Some BGCs co-localized as hybrid clusters, such as NRPS/trans-amino transferase polyketide synthase (transAT-PKS), NRPS/type I polyketide synthase (T1PKS), aryl polyene/ectoine, and NRPS/NRPS-like/T1PKS (Table S6). Ten BGCs were identified in Photobacterium sp. CCB-ST2H9, including clusters potentially encoding beta-lactone, butyrolactone, cyanobactin, ectoine, NRPS, NRPS-like, NRPS/NRPS-like, RiPP-like, and siderophore (Table 2). All Photobacterium except P. lipolyticum and P. sanguinicancri harbour a beta-lactone cluster. The CCB-ST2H9 beta-lactone cluster contained the biosynthetic gene encoding 2-isopropylmalate synthase, which is involved in the biosynthesis of beta-lactone [42] but shows no correlation with known clusters. CCB-ST2H9 also harbors a BGC for butyrolactone, a quorum sensing molecule related to the regulation of antibiotic production and morphogenesis [43]. The cyanobactin BGC uniquely found in the CCB-ST2H9 genome displayed no match to known clusters. Due to the diversity of gene products and cluster organization in BGCs, some predicted cluster regions do not resemble known database entries. P. indicum, P. frigidiphilum, P. ganghwense, P. lipolyticum, P. galatheae, P. arenosum, P. haloterans, P. salinisoli, and CCB-ST2H9 all have BGCs coding for ectoine that are reported to play a role in osmotolerance [44]. The lack of ectoine in other Photobacterium strains implies that they might utilize different strategies for osmoregulation in hypersaline environments. Although a RiPP-like BGC was detected in CCB-ST2H9, it did not show similarity to known clusters. Many bacteria have developed the ability to secrete iron-chelating molecules or siderophores that bind iron to form siderophore-iron complexes that are then liberated internally in the cell [45]. Siderophores enable producers to scavenge dissolved iron from the environment and deprive competitors of it. Under iron-limiting conditions, siderophore-producing bacteria have a competitive advantage over other species that lack iron-chelating ability [46]. A siderophore BGC showing high homology (88%) to aerobactin from Aliivibrio fisheri ES114, which is a hydroxamate-type siderophore, was identified in CCB-ST2H9. The presence of the siderophore aerobactin in P. halotolerans MELD1 contributes to the protection of host plants from phytopathogens [47]. Similarly, the siderophore aerobactin in CCB-ST2H9 could contribute to its antagonistic potential. The identified NRPS in CCB-ST2H9 showing 100% similarity to BGC in the database include xenotetrapeptide of Xenorhabdus nematophila ATCC 19061. While X. nematophila has been studied for xenematide activity, the function of xenotetrapeptide in this strain has not been explored [48]. Another NRPS with potential biosynthetic novelty shows low homology (38%) with the holomycin gene cluster in Streptomyces clavuligerus ATCC 27064. Holomycin production has been reported in both P. galatheae and P. halotolerans and examined in terms of the biosynthetic gene cluster and physiological role [16,49,50]. Holomycin is a member of the dithiolopyrrolone class that displays antibiotic activity against a broad spectrum of bacteria and inhibits RNA synthesis [51,52]. Further sequence analysis revealed that the CCB-ST2H9 holomycin BGC contains 10 genes homologous to and arranged in the same manner as those in P. galatheae [49]. The cluster is formed by phosphopantothenoylcysteine decarboxylase, HlmF, metallophosphoesterase, HlmY, globin, HlmG, N-acyltransferase, HlmA, acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, HlmB, thioesterase, HlmC, flavin mononucleotide-dependent oxidoreductase, HlmD, MFS transporter, HlmH, transcriptional regulator, HlmX, and core protein NRPS synthetase, HlmE with a characteristic arrangement of cyclization (Cy), adenylation (A), and thiolation (T) domains (Figure 6). The largest block of conserved genes corresponding to hlmA-hlmE is conserved in all holomycin producers, including S. clauvuligerus, Y. ruckeri, Pseudoalteromonas sp., and Photobacterium [49,53,54,55]. The holomycin BGC was also found in the P. arenosum and P. salinosoli genomes, even though antibiotic production and antagonism in these species have not been investigated. The presence of nearly identical holomycin BGCs in P. galatheae, P. halotolerans, P. arenosum, P. salinisoli, and CCB-ST2H9 suggests that this cluster may have originated via a horizontal gene transfer (HGT) event from a donor closely related to these species. Overall, the annotation of CCB-ST2H9 genes involved in the biosynthesis of compounds with antibacterial and iron scavenging functions is in agreement with the strain’s ability to antagonize the growth of pathogenic bacteria. High variability of the biosynthetic operons in terms of abundance and composition was observed across Photobacterium, with P. galathea carrying the highest number of BGCs (15), while P. carnosum, P. damselae, P. iliopiscarium, and P. toruni have the lowest (2). This is the first study to use clustering based on BGCs profiles to separate the Photobacterium into BGCs-rich and BGCs-low groups. Although no evidence linking environmental sources and BGCs was found, the frequency of BGCs types appears to correlate with genetic proximity. Notably, CCB-ST2H9 displays a similar frequency of BGCs with P. halotolerans, P. arenosum, P. galathea, and P. salinisoli that are phylogenetically close. Except for P. alginatilyticum and P. proteolyticum that are phylogenetically distant, these strains cluster together by the presence of a large number of BGCs in their genomes. Conversely, it could also be claimed that the acquisition of gene clusters leads to ecological diversity and speciation, forming a phylogenetically distinct clade of P. arenosum, P. halotolerans, P. salinisoli, P. galathea, and CCB-ST2H9. The wide distribution of bioactive metabolites in these Photobacterium strains suggests good potential for antibiotic production and as biocontrol agents. In addition, the variable distribution of BGCs in Photobacterium is indicative of gene loss from the descendants of a cluster-harboring ancestor and HGT or recombination events. Genes encoding traits subjected to weak selection are more likely to be lost, whereas genes that confer positive benefits under certain conditions are likely to be gained. For instance, a polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) biosynthetic cluster that is present in other Photobacterium strains was not detected in CCB-ST2H9. Since the PUFA cluster has been linked to cold temperature adaptation [56], it could have been lost in the evolution of non-psychrophiles Photobacterium. On the other hand, the presence of BGCs for antibiotics in Photobacterium such as P. arenosum, P. halotolerans, P. salinisoli, P. galatheae, and CCB-ST2H9 raises the intriguing question of the ecological significance of the BGCs to the producers. In habitats characterized by dense multispecies communities, bacteria compete with their neighbours for scarce resources [57]. Antibiotic compound productions are proposed as weapons that provide fitness advantage over other occupants of the same ecological niche [58]. Compared to free-living Photobacterium, densely colonized sediment and soil could be the factor driving the evolution of antibiotic-producing traits in strains such as P. arenosum, P. salinisoli, and CCB-ST2H9. This view is in line with results from pelagic ocean samples, which showed increased antagonism of particle-attached bacteria compared to free-living bacteria [59]. Overall, the distinct BGC profiles displayed by Photobacterium from diverse habitats provide clues that metabolite production capacity could be the result of habitat-specific adaptation. 2.5. Antimicrobial Activity of EtOAc Extract against Vibrio spp. As analysed above, CCB-ST2H9 possesses the holomycin biosynthetic gene cluster in its genome. To confirm the production of antagonistic compounds, EtOAc extraction was performed from the culture supernatant. Disc diffusion assay of the crude extract resuspended in methanol was conducted against seven Vibrio spp., including VpAHPND, and two bacterial strains, E. coli DH5α and Bacillus sp. CCB-MMP212, as positive controls. Oliver and co-researchers reported that holomycin exhibited antimicrobial activity against both Gram-positive and negative bacteria such as Staphylococcus and E. coli [51]. Besides that, holomycin isolated from P. galarheae S2753 exhibited the antagonistic activity against several marine bacteria, including the genus Vibrio [49]. As shown in Figure 7, the crude extract also showed antimicrobial activity on Bacillus sp. CCB-MMP212 (Gram-positive) and E. coli DH5α (Gram-negative). All Vibrio spp. tested were susceptible to the crude extract (Figure 7). It was reported that AHPND could be caused not only by V. parahaemolyticus but also other non-pathogenic Vibrio species because of the introduction of the pVA1 plasmid carrying the pirAB gene encoding homologues of Photorhabdus insect-related (Pir) toxins [60]. This finding suggests that CCB-ST2H9 might have the potential as a novel biocontrol agent due to its broad host range of antagonistic compounds.