Results edeB encodes a putative ParB family protein The protein EdeB (Genebank accession: ATF13884.1) encoded by the edeB gene consists of 256 amino acids with a molecular weight of 30.4 kDa. Bioinformatics analyses showed that EdeB protein was a member of the ParB family proteins, and the N-terminal of EdeB contained a SnbI_like domain (
Figure 1B
). PROSITE analysis identified a number of functional sites in EdeB, including Protein kinase C phosphorylation, N-myristoylation, and N-glycosylation, and Casein kinase II phosphorylation sites (
Figure 1C
). The amino acid sequences of EdeB and three homologs of ParB family proteins from other bacterial species were aligned and reviewed using the Jalview software. The results showed that EdeB was a member of the ParB family proteins with highly conserved sequences (
Figure 1D
). Disruption of edeB significantly reduced edeine biosynthesis and inhibited the antibacterial activity of B. brevis X23 In order to explore the role of edeB in edeine biosynthesis, the edeB gene was replaced by apramycin resistance gene through Red/ET homologous recombination, and the mutant was named as X23 (ΔedeB)-apra. Then the Cre enzyme plasmid was transferred into X23 (ΔedeB)-apra to finally obtain B. brevis X23(ΔedeB) strain through removing the Aprar (
Figure 2A
). We compared the cell growth curves of wild-type strain B. brevis X23, edeB-deletion mutant X23(ΔedeB), complementary strain X23(ΔedeB)(PAD-Apr-Px-edeB) in NB fermentation medium. The results showed that no significant difference in the cell growth curves was detected among the wild-type B. brevis X23, X23 (ΔedeB), and X23(ΔedeB)(PAD-Apr-Px-edeB). (Figure 2B). Figure 2Comparison of antibacterial activity between edeB -deletion mutant and complementation strains. (A)
edeB gene knockout flow chart. (B) Growth curve comparison. (C) Antibacterial ability comparison. (D)Comparison of radius of the inhibition zone. Different letters indicate statistically significant differences (P < 0.05). Comparison of antibacterial activity between edeB -deletion mutant and complementation strains. (A)
edeB gene knockout flow chart. (B) Growth curve comparison. (C) Antibacterial ability comparison. (D)Comparison of radius of the inhibition zone. Different letters indicate statistically significant differences (P < 0.05). The antibacterial activity of fermentation products was compared among wild-type B. brevis X23, X23 (ΔedeB), and X23(ΔedeB)(PAD-Apr-Px-edeB) cultured in NB medium for 48 hours. The results showed that the inhibition zone of X23 (ΔedeB) was significantly smaller than that of the wild-type B. brevis X23. The inhibition zone of the X23 (ΔedeB) (PAD-Apr-Px-edeB) was significantly larger than that of wild-type B. brevis X23 (
Figures 2C, D
). Taken together, edeB disruption significantly inhibited the antibacterial activity of B. brevis X23. To further explore the effect of EdeB on edeine biosynthesis, HPLC-MS was used to compare edeine production among wild-type B. brevis strain X23, X23 (ΔedeB), and X23 (ΔedeB) (PAD-Apr-Px-edeB). The results showed that X23 (ΔedeB) still produced edeines, but the yield of edeine A and B decreased by 17.67% and 16.16%, respectively, compared with wild-type B. brevis strain X23. edeB gene complementation increased the yields of edeine A and B in X23 (ΔedeB) (PAD-Apr-Px-edeB) by 20.88% and 13.53%, respectively, compared with wild-type B. brevis X23 (
Figure 3
). These results confirmed that EdeB improved edeines biosynthesis, which is consistent with the above results of antibacterial activity evaluation. Figure 3Comparison of edeine production among wild-type B. brevis X23, X23 (ΔedeB), and X23 (ΔedeB) (PAD-Apr-Px-edeB) by HPLC-MS. (A) Comparison of edeine yield by HPLC-MS analysis. The retention time of edeine A and B was indicated by the dotted lines. (B) The mass spectrogram of edeine A and B. The molecular ions [M+H]+ were 755.444 m/z and 797.465 m/z, respectively. (C) Change of edeine A and B yield after 48 h fermentation. Comparison of edeine production among wild-type B. brevis X23, X23 (ΔedeB), and X23 (ΔedeB) (PAD-Apr-Px-edeB) by HPLC-MS. (A) Comparison of edeine yield by HPLC-MS analysis. The retention time of edeine A and B was indicated by the dotted lines. (B) The mass spectrogram of edeine A and B. The molecular ions [M+H]+ were 755.444 m/z and 797.465 m/z, respectively. (C) Change of edeine A and B yield after 48 h fermentation. Deletion of edeB gene significantly inhibited the expression of ede BGC To study the effect of EdeB on the transcription of ede BGC, we compared the expression of genes edeA (encoding a transporter protein), edeQ (encoding a resistance enzyme), and edeK (encoding a non-ribosomal peptide synthase, NPRS) between X23(ΔedeB) and wild-type B. brevis X23. And the 16S rRNA gene with stable transcriptional expression was selected as the internal reference. The value of the target gene measured by the ΔΔCt formula. Greater than 2.0 or less than 0.5 means that the transcription level of the target gene is significantly increased or decreased. The RT-qPCR results showed that the transcription level of edeA, edeQ, and edeK in X23(ΔedeB) significantly decreased compared with that in the wild-type B. brevis X23, suggesting that EdeB was a positive regulator in edeine biosynthesis (
Figure 4
). Figure 4Effects of edeB gene knockout on the transcription levels of edeA, edeQ, and edeK. * statistically significant difference. Effects of edeB gene knockout on the transcription levels of edeA, edeQ, and edeK. * statistically significant difference. Bioinformatics analysis of the main elements of promoter edepro in ede BGC The ede BGC promoter (~200 bp), namely edePro, has been previously identified and characterized (Liu et al., 2022). Bioinformatic analyses identified a -10 and -35 region in the sequence of ede BGC promoter edePro (
Figure 5A
). The transcriptional factor binding site (TFBS) sequences were involved in binding with transcription factors Crp (cAMP receptor protein) and arcA (Arginine deiminase). WebLogo 3.0 conservative identification program showed that the 6-nucleotide sequence in the -10 region was similar to the classical -10 region (TATAAT), and the 6-nucleotide sequence in the -35 region was identical to the classical -35 region (TTGACA) (
Figure 5B
). Figure 5The edeine promoter edePro. (A) Bioinformatic analysis of edePro by BPROM and BDGP. (B) Conservative identification of -10 and-35 region in edePro. The edeine promoter edePro. (A) Bioinformatic analysis of edePro by BPROM and BDGP. (B) Conservative identification of -10 and-35 region in edePro. EdeB directly regulates the promoter region of ede BGC Transcriptional regulators usually control transcription by specifically binding to the promoter region of target genes (Leslie and Justin, 2013). In order to study whether EdeB regulates edeine biosynthesis through the same way, EMSA was used to evaluate the binding ability of EdeB with the promoter region of ede BGC. The results showed that EdeB inhibited the migration of promoter fragment edePro, suggesting that EdeB directly interact with ede BGC. The interaction between EdeB and ede BGC was further confirmed (
Figure 6
). Taken together, EdeB improved the transcription of ede BGC and edeine production in B. brevis by directly binding to its promoter region. Figure 6The binding ability of EdeB to ede BGC analyzed by EMSA. – : 0 μg EdeB protein; + : 1 μg EdeB protein. The binding ability of EdeB to ede BGC analyzed by EMSA. – : 0 μg EdeB protein; + : 1 μg EdeB protein. edeB overexpression enhanced edeine production The yield of edeine A and B in X23 (PAD-Apr-Px-edeB) was increased by 96.60% and 27.26%, respectively, by edeB gene overexpression and the total yield of edeines was increased by 92.27% (
Figure 7
). These results confirmed that EdeB improved edeine biosynthesis. Figure 7Edeine production in wild-type B. brevis X23 and X23 (PAD-Apr-Px-edeB). (A) Comparison of edeine yield by HPLC-MS analysis. The retention time of edeine A and B was indicated by the dotted lines. (B) Change of edeine A and B yield after 48 h fermentation. Edeine production in wild-type B. brevis X23 and X23 (PAD-Apr-Px-edeB). (A) Comparison of edeine yield by HPLC-MS analysis. The retention time of edeine A and B was indicated by the dotted lines. (B) Change of edeine A and B yield after 48 h fermentation.