Cystargolides are natural products originally isolated from Kitasatospora cystarginea NRRL B16505 as inhibitors of the proteasome. They are composed of a dipeptide backbone linked to a β-lactone warhead. Recently, we identified the cystargolide biosynthetic gene cluster, but systematic genetic analyses had not been carried out because of the lack of a heterologous expression system. Here, we report the discovery of a homologous cystargolide biosynthetic pathway in Streptomyces durhamensis NRRL-B3309 by genome mining. The gene cluster was cloned via transformation-associated recombination and heterologously expressed in Streptomyces coelicolor M512. We demonstrate that it contains all genes necessary for the production of cystargolide A and B. Single gene deletion experiments reveal that only five of the eight genes from the initially proposed gene cluster are essential for cystargolide synthesis. Additional insights into the cystargolide pathway could be obtained from in vitro assays with CysG and chemical complementation of the respective gene knockout. This could be further supported by the in vitro investigation of the CysG homolog BelI from the belactosin biosynthetic gene cluster. Thereby, we confirm that CysG and BelI catalyze a cryptic SAM-dependent transfer of a methyl group that is critical for the construction of the cystargolide and belactosin β-lactone warheads. Keywords Abbreviations biosynthetic gene cluster extracted ion chromatogram high performance liquid chromatography mass spectrometry Isopropylmalate Isopropylmalate synthase tandem mass spectrometry non-ribosomal peptide synthetase polyketide synthetase transformation associated recombination total ion chromatogram S-adenosyl methionine 3-sec-butyl malate Reviewed by members of the JBC Editorial Board. Edited by Sarah E. O'Connor The proteasome is the central component in non-lysosomal protein degradation (1, 2). It plays a vital role in a multitude of cellular processes, such as cell cycle control (3), apoptosis (4), and immune response (5). The multi-subunit protein complex is associated with various diseases including neurodegenerative (6, 7) or cardiovascular disorders (8) and different types of cancers (9). Consequently, the proteasome is a validated target for the development of small-molecule pharmaceutics. Most of these are designed to covalently bind the catalytic subunits and inactivate the active site in a reversible or irreversible manner (10). Cystargolides A and B were originally isolated from Kitasatospora cystarginea NRRL B16505 and were found to inhibit the human proteasome and the caseinolytic protease ClpP in the micromolar range (11, 12, 13). The cystargolides feature a β-lactone warhead and a dipeptide backbone similar to the well-characterized belactosins (Fig. 1). Belactosins A and C are produced by Streptomyces sp. UCK 14 and, in analogy to the cystargolides, primarily block the function of the chymotrypsin-like β5 subunit of the 20S proteasome (14, 15). Notably, many β-lactone-containing secondary metabolites are synthesized by non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) or polyketide synthases (PKSs) (16, 17). We recently identified the cystargolide biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) and constructed gene disruption mutants in K. cystarginea NRRL B16505 (18). This revealed that the cystargolide and belactosin formation does not involve NRPS or PKS machinery but proceeds via single enzyme amino acid ligases. Intriguingly, the route to the carbon scaffold of their β-lactone warheads is reminiscent of leucine biosynthesis. Here, we present a homologous cystargolide BGC from Streptomyces durhamensis NRRL-B3309. The gene cluster was cloned via transformation-associated recombination (TAR) and heterologously expressed in Streptomyces coelicolor M512 allowing a systematic set of gene knockouts to investigate the functions of the encoded proteins.Figure 1Chemical structure of cystargolides and belactosins. Figure 1Chemical structure of cystargolides and belactosins. Chemical structure of cystargolides and belactosins. Results Results In order to characterize the biosynthetic pathway of the cystargolides, we attempted to heterologously express the BGC we identified in K. cystarginea NRRL B16505 (18). However, this pathway could not be stably introduced in various Streptomyces strains. In order to characterize the biosynthetic pathway of the cystargolides, we attempted to heterologously express the BGC we identified in K. cystarginea NRRL B16505 (18). However, this pathway could not be stably introduced in various Streptomyces strains. Identification and heterologous expression of a homologous cystargolide pathway in Streptomyces Identification and heterologous expression of a homologous cystargolide pathway in Streptomyces Identification and heterologous expression of a homologous cystargolide pathway in Streptomyces Using MultiGeneBLAST, we discovered a homologous putative cystargolide (cys) BGC in S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 (19). This pathway differs only marginally from the one found in K. cystarginea NRRL B16505, with all eight genes showing sequence identities between 63% and 83% to their respective homologs (Fig. 2; Table S1). Organizationally, only the orientation of cysH in S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 is inverted compared to K. cystarginea NRRL B16505. To confirm the identity of this BGC, the cluster was captured with a pCAP03-derived vector using TAR-based direct cloning technologies (Fig. S3) (20, 21, 22). Therefore, pCAP03 was linearized and equipped with 299 bp extensions on both ends which contained homologous sequences up- and downstream the putative cys BGC. Co-transformation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae with the capture vector and digested genomic DNA from S. durhamensis resulted in the cloning of a 10,809 bp stretch of DNA that contained the complete putative cys BGC as verified by PCR and restriction analysis. Subsequently, the generated cysDM02-construct was introduced into S. coelicolor M512 via triparental mating and stably integrated into the genome taking advantage of the φC31 integration site.Figure 2The cystargolide biosynthetic gene cluster from K. cystarginea NRRL-B16505 (top), S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 (middle), and the belactosin biosynthetic gene cluster from Streptomyces sp. UCK 14 (bottom). The individual genes are colored according to their putative biosynthetic function. Homologous genes in the cystargolide and belactosin BGCs are indicated. Using MultiGeneBLAST, we discovered a homologous putative cystargolide (cys) BGC in S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 (19). This pathway differs only marginally from the one found in K. cystarginea NRRL B16505, with all eight genes showing sequence identities between 63% and 83% to their respective homologs (Fig. 2; Table S1). Organizationally, only the orientation of cysH in S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 is inverted compared to K. cystarginea NRRL B16505. To confirm the identity of this BGC, the cluster was captured with a pCAP03-derived vector using TAR-based direct cloning technologies (Fig. S3) (20, 21, 22). Therefore, pCAP03 was linearized and equipped with 299 bp extensions on both ends which contained homologous sequences up- and downstream the putative cys BGC. Co-transformation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae with the capture vector and digested genomic DNA from S. durhamensis resulted in the cloning of a 10,809 bp stretch of DNA that contained the complete putative cys BGC as verified by PCR and restriction analysis. Subsequently, the generated cysDM02-construct was introduced into S. coelicolor M512 via triparental mating and stably integrated into the genome taking advantage of the φC31 integration site.Figure 2The cystargolide biosynthetic gene cluster from K. cystarginea NRRL-B16505 (top), S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 (middle), and the belactosin biosynthetic gene cluster from Streptomyces sp. UCK 14 (bottom). The individual genes are colored according to their putative biosynthetic function. Homologous genes in the cystargolide and belactosin BGCs are indicated. Using MultiGeneBLAST, we discovered a homologous putative cystargolide (cys) BGC in S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 (19). This pathway differs only marginally from the one found in K. cystarginea NRRL B16505, with all eight genes showing sequence identities between 63% and 83% to their respective homologs (Fig. 2; Table S1). Organizationally, only the orientation of cysH in S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 is inverted compared to K. cystarginea NRRL B16505. To confirm the identity of this BGC, the cluster was captured with a pCAP03-derived vector using TAR-based direct cloning technologies (Fig. S3) (20, 21, 22). Therefore, pCAP03 was linearized and equipped with 299 bp extensions on both ends which contained homologous sequences up- and downstream the putative cys BGC. Co-transformation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae with the capture vector and digested genomic DNA from S. durhamensis resulted in the cloning of a 10,809 bp stretch of DNA that contained the complete putative cys BGC as verified by PCR and restriction analysis. Subsequently, the generated cysDM02-construct was introduced into S. coelicolor M512 via triparental mating and stably integrated into the genome taking advantage of the φC31 integration site.Figure 2The cystargolide biosynthetic gene cluster from K. cystarginea NRRL-B16505 (top), S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 (middle), and the belactosin biosynthetic gene cluster from Streptomyces sp. UCK 14 (bottom). The individual genes are colored according to their putative biosynthetic function. Homologous genes in the cystargolide and belactosin BGCs are indicated. Figure 2The cystargolide biosynthetic gene cluster from K. cystarginea NRRL-B16505 (top), S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 (middle), and the belactosin biosynthetic gene cluster from Streptomyces sp. UCK 14 (bottom). The individual genes are colored according to their putative biosynthetic function. Homologous genes in the cystargolide and belactosin BGCs are indicated. Figure 2The cystargolide biosynthetic gene cluster from K. cystarginea NRRL-B16505 (top), S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 (middle), and the belactosin biosynthetic gene cluster from Streptomyces sp. UCK 14 (bottom). The individual genes are colored according to their putative biosynthetic function. Homologous genes in the cystargolide and belactosin BGCs are indicated. Figure 2The cystargolide biosynthetic gene cluster from K. cystarginea NRRL-B16505 (top), S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 (middle), and the belactosin biosynthetic gene cluster from Streptomyces sp. UCK 14 (bottom). The individual genes are colored according to their putative biosynthetic function. Homologous genes in the cystargolide and belactosin BGCs are indicated. The cystargolide biosynthetic gene cluster from K. cystarginea NRRL-B16505 (top), S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 (middle), and the belactosin biosynthetic gene cluster from Streptomyces sp. UCK 14 (bottom). The individual genes are colored according to their putative biosynthetic function. Homologous genes in the cystargolide and belactosin BGCs are indicated. The cystargolide biosynthetic gene cluster from K. cystarginea NRRL-B16505 (top), S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 (middle), and the belactosin biosynthetic gene cluster from Streptomyces sp. UCK 14 (bottom). The individual genes are colored according to their putative biosynthetic function. Homologous genes in the cystargolide and belactosin BGCs are indicated. The cystargolide biosynthetic gene cluster from K. cystarginea NRRL-B16505 (top), S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 (middle), and the belactosin biosynthetic gene cluster from Streptomyces sp. UCK 14 (bottom). The individual genes are colored according to their putative biosynthetic function. Homologous genes in the cystargolide and belactosin BGCs are indicated. Three individual clones were checked by PCR for the presence of the cys BGC, designated S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02 I-III, and selected for further investigations. Therefore, cells were cultivated in liquid cultures of SM1 medium for 7 days followed by crude extraction with ethyl acetate (EtOAc). A first screening approach revealed the specific activity of extracts from mutants containing the homologous cys pathway in a human proteasome inhibition assay (Fig. S5). Next, the metabolic profiles of the mutants were analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS). Gratifyingly, the characteristic mass signals of cystargolide A (m/z 357.2 [M + H]+) and cystargolide B (m/z 371.2 [M + H]+) were detected at retention times of 10.2 and 9.5 min, respectively (Fig. 3). Similar ions could not be found in extracts of S. coelicolor M512 without the gene cluster. Moreover, tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) revealed characteristic fragmentation patterns for the produced compounds (Fig. S10) identical to cystargolide A and B (18). This confirms that the isolated BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 contains all genes necessary for the synthesis of cystargolides.Figure 3LC-MS analysis of culture crude extracts from the heterologous host strain S. coelicolor M512 containing the cystargolide BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 and its knockout variants compared to S. coelicolor M512 wild type. The retention time of cystargolide B: t = 9.5 min, cystargolide A: t = 10.2 min. A, total ion chromatograms (TIC), cystargolide peaks are highlighted. B, extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) of cystargolide B m/z 357.2 [M + H]+ and cystargolide A m/z 371.2 [M + H]+, the peaks are normalized to the highest intensity. Three individual clones were checked by PCR for the presence of the cys BGC, designated S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02 I-III, and selected for further investigations. Therefore, cells were cultivated in liquid cultures of SM1 medium for 7 days followed by crude extraction with ethyl acetate (EtOAc). A first screening approach revealed the specific activity of extracts from mutants containing the homologous cys pathway in a human proteasome inhibition assay (Fig. S5). Next, the metabolic profiles of the mutants were analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS). Gratifyingly, the characteristic mass signals of cystargolide A (m/z 357.2 [M + H]+) and cystargolide B (m/z 371.2 [M + H]+) were detected at retention times of 10.2 and 9.5 min, respectively (Fig. 3). Similar ions could not be found in extracts of S. coelicolor M512 without the gene cluster. Moreover, tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) revealed characteristic fragmentation patterns for the produced compounds (Fig. S10) identical to cystargolide A and B (18). This confirms that the isolated BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 contains all genes necessary for the synthesis of cystargolides.Figure 3LC-MS analysis of culture crude extracts from the heterologous host strain S. coelicolor M512 containing the cystargolide BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 and its knockout variants compared to S. coelicolor M512 wild type. The retention time of cystargolide B: t = 9.5 min, cystargolide A: t = 10.2 min. A, total ion chromatograms (TIC), cystargolide peaks are highlighted. B, extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) of cystargolide B m/z 357.2 [M + H]+ and cystargolide A m/z 371.2 [M + H]+, the peaks are normalized to the highest intensity. Three individual clones were checked by PCR for the presence of the cys BGC, designated S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02 I-III, and selected for further investigations. Therefore, cells were cultivated in liquid cultures of SM1 medium for 7 days followed by crude extraction with ethyl acetate (EtOAc). A first screening approach revealed the specific activity of extracts from mutants containing the homologous cys pathway in a human proteasome inhibition assay (Fig. S5). Next, the metabolic profiles of the mutants were analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS). Gratifyingly, the characteristic mass signals of cystargolide A (m/z 357.2 [M + H]+) and cystargolide B (m/z 371.2 [M + H]+) were detected at retention times of 10.2 and 9.5 min, respectively (Fig. 3). Similar ions could not be found in extracts of S. coelicolor M512 without the gene cluster. Moreover, tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) revealed characteristic fragmentation patterns for the produced compounds (Fig. S10) identical to cystargolide A and B (18). This confirms that the isolated BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 contains all genes necessary for the synthesis of cystargolides.Figure 3LC-MS analysis of culture crude extracts from the heterologous host strain S. coelicolor M512 containing the cystargolide BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 and its knockout variants compared to S. coelicolor M512 wild type. The retention time of cystargolide B: t = 9.5 min, cystargolide A: t = 10.2 min. A, total ion chromatograms (TIC), cystargolide peaks are highlighted. B, extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) of cystargolide B m/z 357.2 [M + H]+ and cystargolide A m/z 371.2 [M + H]+, the peaks are normalized to the highest intensity. Figure 3LC-MS analysis of culture crude extracts from the heterologous host strain S. coelicolor M512 containing the cystargolide BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 and its knockout variants compared to S. coelicolor M512 wild type. The retention time of cystargolide B: t = 9.5 min, cystargolide A: t = 10.2 min. A, total ion chromatograms (TIC), cystargolide peaks are highlighted. B, extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) of cystargolide B m/z 357.2 [M + H]+ and cystargolide A m/z 371.2 [M + H]+, the peaks are normalized to the highest intensity. Figure 3LC-MS analysis of culture crude extracts from the heterologous host strain S. coelicolor M512 containing the cystargolide BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 and its knockout variants compared to S. coelicolor M512 wild type. The retention time of cystargolide B: t = 9.5 min, cystargolide A: t = 10.2 min. A, total ion chromatograms (TIC), cystargolide peaks are highlighted. B, extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) of cystargolide B m/z 357.2 [M + H]+ and cystargolide A m/z 371.2 [M + H]+, the peaks are normalized to the highest intensity. Figure 3LC-MS analysis of culture crude extracts from the heterologous host strain S. coelicolor M512 containing the cystargolide BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 and its knockout variants compared to S. coelicolor M512 wild type. The retention time of cystargolide B: t = 9.5 min, cystargolide A: t = 10.2 min. A, total ion chromatograms (TIC), cystargolide peaks are highlighted. B, extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) of cystargolide B m/z 357.2 [M + H]+ and cystargolide A m/z 371.2 [M + H]+, the peaks are normalized to the highest intensity. LC-MS analysis of culture crude extracts from the heterologous host strain S. coelicolor M512 containing the cystargolide BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 and its knockout variants compared to S. coelicolor M512 wild type. The retention time of cystargolide B: t = 9.5 min, cystargolide A: t = 10.2 min. A, total ion chromatograms (TIC), cystargolide peaks are highlighted. B, extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) of cystargolide B m/z 357.2 [M + H]+ and cystargolide A m/z 371.2 [M + H]+, the peaks are normalized to the highest intensity. LC-MS analysis of culture crude extracts from the heterologous host strain S. coelicolor M512 containing the cystargolide BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 and its knockout variants compared to S. coelicolor M512 wild type. The retention time of cystargolide B: t = 9.5 min, cystargolide A: t = 10.2 min. A, total ion chromatograms (TIC), cystargolide peaks are highlighted. B, extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) of cystargolide B m/z 357.2 [M + H]+ and cystargolide A m/z 371.2 [M + H]+, the peaks are normalized to the highest intensity. LC-MS analysis of culture crude extracts from the heterologous host strain S. coelicolor M512 containing the cystargolide BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 and its knockout variants compared to S. coelicolor M512 wild type. The retention time of cystargolide B: t = 9.5 min, cystargolide A: t = 10.2 min. A, total ion chromatograms (TIC), cystargolide peaks are highlighted. B, extracted ion chromatograms (EIC) of cystargolide B m/z 357.2 [M + H]+ and cystargolide A m/z 371.2 [M + H]+, the peaks are normalized to the highest intensity. Generation and analysis of gene deletion mutants Generation and analysis of gene deletion mutants Generation and analysis of gene deletion mutants In order to determine the function of the clustered genes, single-gene knockout variants of the cys BGC were heterologously expressed in S. coelicolor M512. Therefore, the genes were individually replaced with an apramycin resistance cassette using the PCR-targeting system (23). Unmarked in-frame gene deletions were generated by excision of the resistance cassettes, taking advantage of the flanking FLP recombination target (FRT) sites. S. coelicolor M512 derivatives containing the modified gene clusters were cultivated and analyzed by LC-MS. This revealed that cystargolide production was not impacted in the knockout mutants with ΔcysA and ΔcysB (Fig. 3). Interestingly, the gene cysA codes for an isopropylmalate synthase-homolog and is likely to be involved in the formation of 2-isopropylmalate (2-IPM) from acetyl-CoA and α-ketoisovalerate. Isopropylmalate synthases (IPMS) are essential for de novo leucine biosynthesis and are a central part of the bacterial primary metabolism. Therefore, the loss of cysA might be complemented by the house-keeping IPMS homolog from the host organism. Indeed, a BLAST analysis of the genome of S. coelicolor detected a putative IPMS (SCO2528) with a sequence identity of 58% on protein level. CysB is a putative major facilitator superfamily (MFS) permease of the DHA2-family. Such transporters have been associated with the extrusion of a variety of chemicals and can confer resistance and self-resistance to antibiotically active compounds (24, 25). We propose that CysB is involved in the export of cystargolides. However, the detected cystargolide production in the respective ΔcysB mutant suggests that the function of CysB in cystargolide secretion is supported by the activity of other intrinsic transporter systems. Indeed, analysis of the cell culture supernatant and the mycelium showed that cystargolides are present in both, the medium and the cells. This was observed for the intact gene cluster as well as the ΔcysB mutant (Fig. S6). The gene cysH encodes a putative LysR-family regulatory protein. These type of proteins are known as transcriptional activators (26). LC-MS analysis of the ΔcysH mutant culture extracts revealed a drastically reduced cystargolide production (Table S6). This strongly indicates that CysH functions as a positive regulator in regards to the cystargolide biosynthesis. In contrast, the knockouts ΔcysC, ΔcysD, ΔcysE, ΔcysF and ΔcysG resulted in the complete abolishment of cystargolide formation (Fig. 3). Of those, three genes, cysC, cysD and cysF, code for putative ATP-dependent carboxylic acid-activating enzymes. CysC and CysF show homology to adenylating enzymes. They generate high-energy acyl-AMP phosphoester intermediates to facilitate e.g. the formation of amide bonds, coenzyme A and acyl-carrier protein (ACP) thioesters or general transesterification reactions. CysD is predicted as a member of the ATP-grasp family which forms reactive acyl monophosphate intermediates that allow similar biochemistry as the adenylates (27, 28, 29). We thus conclude that CysC, CysD, and CysF are involved in converting three carboxylic acid groups to form two amides and a cyclic ester in cystargolide biosynthesis. On the other hand, CysG is a putative SAM-dependent methyltransferase whereas CysE is homologous to methylesterases with a predicted alpha/beta-hydrolase topology. Both enzymes have no obvious function in cystargolide biosynthesis, but intriguingly, a similar methyltransferase/methylesterase pair is encoded in the biosynthetic gene cluster of belactosins (Fig. 2; Table S2) (18, 30, 31). This finding led us to speculate that CysE and CysG might be involved in the formation of the characteristic β-lactone warhead. Indeed, the complete loss of cystargolide production in the respective gene deletion mutants appear to support this hypothesis (Fig. 3). In order to determine the function of the clustered genes, single-gene knockout variants of the cys BGC were heterologously expressed in S. coelicolor M512. Therefore, the genes were individually replaced with an apramycin resistance cassette using the PCR-targeting system (23). Unmarked in-frame gene deletions were generated by excision of the resistance cassettes, taking advantage of the flanking FLP recombination target (FRT) sites. S. coelicolor M512 derivatives containing the modified gene clusters were cultivated and analyzed by LC-MS. This revealed that cystargolide production was not impacted in the knockout mutants with ΔcysA and ΔcysB (Fig. 3). Interestingly, the gene cysA codes for an isopropylmalate synthase-homolog and is likely to be involved in the formation of 2-isopropylmalate (2-IPM) from acetyl-CoA and α-ketoisovalerate. Isopropylmalate synthases (IPMS) are essential for de novo leucine biosynthesis and are a central part of the bacterial primary metabolism. Therefore, the loss of cysA might be complemented by the house-keeping IPMS homolog from the host organism. Indeed, a BLAST analysis of the genome of S. coelicolor detected a putative IPMS (SCO2528) with a sequence identity of 58% on protein level. CysB is a putative major facilitator superfamily (MFS) permease of the DHA2-family. Such transporters have been associated with the extrusion of a variety of chemicals and can confer resistance and self-resistance to antibiotically active compounds (24, 25). We propose that CysB is involved in the export of cystargolides. However, the detected cystargolide production in the respective ΔcysB mutant suggests that the function of CysB in cystargolide secretion is supported by the activity of other intrinsic transporter systems. Indeed, analysis of the cell culture supernatant and the mycelium showed that cystargolides are present in both, the medium and the cells. This was observed for the intact gene cluster as well as the ΔcysB mutant (Fig. S6). The gene cysH encodes a putative LysR-family regulatory protein. These type of proteins are known as transcriptional activators (26). LC-MS analysis of the ΔcysH mutant culture extracts revealed a drastically reduced cystargolide production (Table S6). This strongly indicates that CysH functions as a positive regulator in regards to the cystargolide biosynthesis. In contrast, the knockouts ΔcysC, ΔcysD, ΔcysE, ΔcysF and ΔcysG resulted in the complete abolishment of cystargolide formation (Fig. 3). Of those, three genes, cysC, cysD and cysF, code for putative ATP-dependent carboxylic acid-activating enzymes. CysC and CysF show homology to adenylating enzymes. They generate high-energy acyl-AMP phosphoester intermediates to facilitate e.g. the formation of amide bonds, coenzyme A and acyl-carrier protein (ACP) thioesters or general transesterification reactions. CysD is predicted as a member of the ATP-grasp family which forms reactive acyl monophosphate intermediates that allow similar biochemistry as the adenylates (27, 28, 29). We thus conclude that CysC, CysD, and CysF are involved in converting three carboxylic acid groups to form two amides and a cyclic ester in cystargolide biosynthesis. On the other hand, CysG is a putative SAM-dependent methyltransferase whereas CysE is homologous to methylesterases with a predicted alpha/beta-hydrolase topology. Both enzymes have no obvious function in cystargolide biosynthesis, but intriguingly, a similar methyltransferase/methylesterase pair is encoded in the biosynthetic gene cluster of belactosins (Fig. 2; Table S2) (18, 30, 31). This finding led us to speculate that CysE and CysG might be involved in the formation of the characteristic β-lactone warhead. Indeed, the complete loss of cystargolide production in the respective gene deletion mutants appear to support this hypothesis (Fig. 3). In order to determine the function of the clustered genes, single-gene knockout variants of the cys BGC were heterologously expressed in S. coelicolor M512. Therefore, the genes were individually replaced with an apramycin resistance cassette using the PCR-targeting system (23). Unmarked in-frame gene deletions were generated by excision of the resistance cassettes, taking advantage of the flanking FLP recombination target (FRT) sites. S. coelicolor M512 derivatives containing the modified gene clusters were cultivated and analyzed by LC-MS. This revealed that cystargolide production was not impacted in the knockout mutants with ΔcysA and ΔcysB (Fig. 3). Interestingly, the gene cysA codes for an isopropylmalate synthase-homolog and is likely to be involved in the formation of 2-isopropylmalate (2-IPM) from acetyl-CoA and α-ketoisovalerate. Isopropylmalate synthases (IPMS) are essential for de novo leucine biosynthesis and are a central part of the bacterial primary metabolism. Therefore, the loss of cysA might be complemented by the house-keeping IPMS homolog from the host organism. Indeed, a BLAST analysis of the genome of S. coelicolor detected a putative IPMS (SCO2528) with a sequence identity of 58% on protein level. CysB is a putative major facilitator superfamily (MFS) permease of the DHA2-family. Such transporters have been associated with the extrusion of a variety of chemicals and can confer resistance and self-resistance to antibiotically active compounds (24, 25). We propose that CysB is involved in the export of cystargolides. However, the detected cystargolide production in the respective ΔcysB mutant suggests that the function of CysB in cystargolide secretion is supported by the activity of other intrinsic transporter systems. Indeed, analysis of the cell culture supernatant and the mycelium showed that cystargolides are present in both, the medium and the cells. This was observed for the intact gene cluster as well as the ΔcysB mutant (Fig. S6). The gene cysH encodes a putative LysR-family regulatory protein. These type of proteins are known as transcriptional activators (26). LC-MS analysis of the ΔcysH mutant culture extracts revealed a drastically reduced cystargolide production (Table S6). This strongly indicates that CysH functions as a positive regulator in regards to the cystargolide biosynthesis. In contrast, the knockouts ΔcysC, ΔcysD, ΔcysE, ΔcysF and ΔcysG resulted in the complete abolishment of cystargolide formation (Fig. 3). Of those, three genes, cysC, cysD and cysF, code for putative ATP-dependent carboxylic acid-activating enzymes. CysC and CysF show homology to adenylating enzymes. They generate high-energy acyl-AMP phosphoester intermediates to facilitate e.g. the formation of amide bonds, coenzyme A and acyl-carrier protein (ACP) thioesters or general transesterification reactions. CysD is predicted as a member of the ATP-grasp family which forms reactive acyl monophosphate intermediates that allow similar biochemistry as the adenylates (27, 28, 29). We thus conclude that CysC, CysD, and CysF are involved in converting three carboxylic acid groups to form two amides and a cyclic ester in cystargolide biosynthesis. On the other hand, CysG is a putative SAM-dependent methyltransferase whereas CysE is homologous to methylesterases with a predicted alpha/beta-hydrolase topology. Both enzymes have no obvious function in cystargolide biosynthesis, but intriguingly, a similar methyltransferase/methylesterase pair is encoded in the biosynthetic gene cluster of belactosins (Fig. 2; Table S2) (18, 30, 31). This finding led us to speculate that CysE and CysG might be involved in the formation of the characteristic β-lactone warhead. Indeed, the complete loss of cystargolide production in the respective gene deletion mutants appear to support this hypothesis (Fig. 3). Investigation of the methyltransferase CysG Investigation of the methyltransferase CysG Investigation of the methyltransferase CysG To further explore the role of CysG in cystargolide biosynthesis we cloned and overexpressed cysG in Escherichia coli Rosetta DE3 pLysS. Using an N-terminal His-tag and Ni-NTA affinity chromatography 10 mg/L pure and soluble recombinant protein was obtained (Fig. S7). Given the absence of a methyl group in the final cystargolide product we wondered if CysG might act on one of the building blocks or their precursors prior to the final compound assembly. We therefore incubated CysG with S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) and 3-isopropylmalate (3-IPM) as a putative acceptor substrate. Strikingly, a single product peak could be detected by LC-MS analysis with m/z 191.08 [M + H]+, matching the expected mono-methylated 3-IPM (Fig. 4A). This compound was absent in the control assays lacking either CysG or SAM. Since 3-IPM offers three possible targets for methyl-group transfer (2-OH, COOH-1, and COOH-4), the product of the CysG-mediated biotransformation was subjected to structural characterization by NMR spectroscopy (Figs. S11–S28 and Tables S7–S9).Figure 4LC-MS analysis of the in vitro enzyme activity of CysG and BelI.A, in vitro methylation of 3-isopropyl malate (3-IPM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase CysG. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-IPM (substrate) and Met 3-IPM (3-IPM-1-methyl ester, product). B, in vitro methylation of 3-sec-butylmalate (3-sBM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase BelI. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-sBM (substrate) and methylated 3-sBM (product). To further explore the role of CysG in cystargolide biosynthesis we cloned and overexpressed cysG in Escherichia coli Rosetta DE3 pLysS. Using an N-terminal His-tag and Ni-NTA affinity chromatography 10 mg/L pure and soluble recombinant protein was obtained (Fig. S7). Given the absence of a methyl group in the final cystargolide product we wondered if CysG might act on one of the building blocks or their precursors prior to the final compound assembly. We therefore incubated CysG with S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) and 3-isopropylmalate (3-IPM) as a putative acceptor substrate. Strikingly, a single product peak could be detected by LC-MS analysis with m/z 191.08 [M + H]+, matching the expected mono-methylated 3-IPM (Fig. 4A). This compound was absent in the control assays lacking either CysG or SAM. Since 3-IPM offers three possible targets for methyl-group transfer (2-OH, COOH-1, and COOH-4), the product of the CysG-mediated biotransformation was subjected to structural characterization by NMR spectroscopy (Figs. S11–S28 and Tables S7–S9).Figure 4LC-MS analysis of the in vitro enzyme activity of CysG and BelI.A, in vitro methylation of 3-isopropyl malate (3-IPM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase CysG. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-IPM (substrate) and Met 3-IPM (3-IPM-1-methyl ester, product). B, in vitro methylation of 3-sec-butylmalate (3-sBM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase BelI. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-sBM (substrate) and methylated 3-sBM (product). To further explore the role of CysG in cystargolide biosynthesis we cloned and overexpressed cysG in Escherichia coli Rosetta DE3 pLysS. Using an N-terminal His-tag and Ni-NTA affinity chromatography 10 mg/L pure and soluble recombinant protein was obtained (Fig. S7). Given the absence of a methyl group in the final cystargolide product we wondered if CysG might act on one of the building blocks or their precursors prior to the final compound assembly. We therefore incubated CysG with S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) and 3-isopropylmalate (3-IPM) as a putative acceptor substrate. Strikingly, a single product peak could be detected by LC-MS analysis with m/z 191.08 [M + H]+, matching the expected mono-methylated 3-IPM (Fig. 4A). This compound was absent in the control assays lacking either CysG or SAM. Since 3-IPM offers three possible targets for methyl-group transfer (2-OH, COOH-1, and COOH-4), the product of the CysG-mediated biotransformation was subjected to structural characterization by NMR spectroscopy (Figs. S11–S28 and Tables S7–S9).Figure 4LC-MS analysis of the in vitro enzyme activity of CysG and BelI.A, in vitro methylation of 3-isopropyl malate (3-IPM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase CysG. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-IPM (substrate) and Met 3-IPM (3-IPM-1-methyl ester, product). B, in vitro methylation of 3-sec-butylmalate (3-sBM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase BelI. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-sBM (substrate) and methylated 3-sBM (product). Figure 4LC-MS analysis of the in vitro enzyme activity of CysG and BelI.A, in vitro methylation of 3-isopropyl malate (3-IPM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase CysG. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-IPM (substrate) and Met 3-IPM (3-IPM-1-methyl ester, product). B, in vitro methylation of 3-sec-butylmalate (3-sBM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase BelI. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-sBM (substrate) and methylated 3-sBM (product). Figure 4LC-MS analysis of the in vitro enzyme activity of CysG and BelI.A, in vitro methylation of 3-isopropyl malate (3-IPM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase CysG. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-IPM (substrate) and Met 3-IPM (3-IPM-1-methyl ester, product). B, in vitro methylation of 3-sec-butylmalate (3-sBM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase BelI. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-sBM (substrate) and methylated 3-sBM (product). Figure 4LC-MS analysis of the in vitro enzyme activity of CysG and BelI.A, in vitro methylation of 3-isopropyl malate (3-IPM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase CysG. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-IPM (substrate) and Met 3-IPM (3-IPM-1-methyl ester, product). B, in vitro methylation of 3-sec-butylmalate (3-sBM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase BelI. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-sBM (substrate) and methylated 3-sBM (product). LC-MS analysis of the in vitro enzyme activity of CysG and BelI.A, in vitro methylation of 3-isopropyl malate (3-IPM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase CysG. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-IPM (substrate) and Met 3-IPM (3-IPM-1-methyl ester, product). B, in vitro methylation of 3-sec-butylmalate (3-sBM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase BelI. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-sBM (substrate) and methylated 3-sBM (product). LC-MS analysis of the in vitro enzyme activity of CysG and BelI.A, in vitro methylation of 3-isopropyl malate (3-IPM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase CysG. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-IPM (substrate) and Met 3-IPM (3-IPM-1-methyl ester, product). B, in vitro methylation of 3-sec-butylmalate (3-sBM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase BelI. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-sBM (substrate) and methylated 3-sBM (product). LC-MS analysis of the in vitro enzyme activity of CysG and BelI.A, in vitro methylation of 3-isopropyl malate (3-IPM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase CysG. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-IPM (substrate) and Met 3-IPM (3-IPM-1-methyl ester, product). B, in vitro methylation of 3-sec-butylmalate (3-sBM) by the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase BelI. Total ion chromatograms with highlighted signals for 3-sBM (substrate) and methylated 3-sBM (product). A comparison of the 1D NMR spectra of 3-IPM with those of its methylated version revealed that all carbon atoms except C-2 and C-7 experienced slight field shifts in the range of 0.4 to 1 ppm in the 13C NMR spectrum and that one additional oxygenated methyl group (δH/C 3.60/51.4) was formed (Tables S7 and S8). In the corresponding 1H-13C-HMBC NMR spectrum, the latter showed long-range correlations either with C-1 or C4, indicating that one of the carboxylic acids was esterified. Due to the biotransformation, C-1 and C-4 shifted and exhibited highly similar 13C NMR shift values (δC 174.03 and 174.22), which prevented initially an unambiguous assignment. Since the application of a higher magnetic field strength (16.4 T instead of 9.4 T) to increase resolution was only marginally successful, an acetylation strategy was applied. Peracetylation of methylated 3-IPM and subsequent NMR analysis unveiled, that the 2-OH group was acetylated as expected, evidenced by cross peaks H3-10/C-9 and H3-10/C-2 in the HMBC spectrum. This modification enabled carbon atoms C-1 and C-4 to be sufficiently magnetically non-equivalent and well resolved (δC 169.2 and 171.6, respectively), which allowed the determination of the exact methylation site. Consequently, the observed long-range coupling between H3-8 and C-1 (Fig. S25) unequivocally led to the conclusion that the original biotransformation product represented indeed 3-IPM-1-methyl-ester. A comparison of the 1D NMR spectra of 3-IPM with those of its methylated version revealed that all carbon atoms except C-2 and C-7 experienced slight field shifts in the range of 0.4 to 1 ppm in the 13C NMR spectrum and that one additional oxygenated methyl group (δH/C 3.60/51.4) was formed (Tables S7 and S8). In the corresponding 1H-13C-HMBC NMR spectrum, the latter showed long-range correlations either with C-1 or C4, indicating that one of the carboxylic acids was esterified. Due to the biotransformation, C-1 and C-4 shifted and exhibited highly similar 13C NMR shift values (δC 174.03 and 174.22), which prevented initially an unambiguous assignment. Since the application of a higher magnetic field strength (16.4 T instead of 9.4 T) to increase resolution was only marginally successful, an acetylation strategy was applied. Peracetylation of methylated 3-IPM and subsequent NMR analysis unveiled, that the 2-OH group was acetylated as expected, evidenced by cross peaks H3-10/C-9 and H3-10/C-2 in the HMBC spectrum. This modification enabled carbon atoms C-1 and C-4 to be sufficiently magnetically non-equivalent and well resolved (δC 169.2 and 171.6, respectively), which allowed the determination of the exact methylation site. Consequently, the observed long-range coupling between H3-8 and C-1 (Fig. S25) unequivocally led to the conclusion that the original biotransformation product represented indeed 3-IPM-1-methyl-ester. A comparison of the 1D NMR spectra of 3-IPM with those of its methylated version revealed that all carbon atoms except C-2 and C-7 experienced slight field shifts in the range of 0.4 to 1 ppm in the 13C NMR spectrum and that one additional oxygenated methyl group (δH/C 3.60/51.4) was formed (Tables S7 and S8). In the corresponding 1H-13C-HMBC NMR spectrum, the latter showed long-range correlations either with C-1 or C4, indicating that one of the carboxylic acids was esterified. Due to the biotransformation, C-1 and C-4 shifted and exhibited highly similar 13C NMR shift values (δC 174.03 and 174.22), which prevented initially an unambiguous assignment. Since the application of a higher magnetic field strength (16.4 T instead of 9.4 T) to increase resolution was only marginally successful, an acetylation strategy was applied. Peracetylation of methylated 3-IPM and subsequent NMR analysis unveiled, that the 2-OH group was acetylated as expected, evidenced by cross peaks H3-10/C-9 and H3-10/C-2 in the HMBC spectrum. This modification enabled carbon atoms C-1 and C-4 to be sufficiently magnetically non-equivalent and well resolved (δC 169.2 and 171.6, respectively), which allowed the determination of the exact methylation site. Consequently, the observed long-range coupling between H3-8 and C-1 (Fig. S25) unequivocally led to the conclusion that the original biotransformation product represented indeed 3-IPM-1-methyl-ester. Next, we wanted to confirm that the CysG in vitro product is a genuine intermediate in the cystargolide pathway. Therefore, we fed 3-IPM-1-methyl-ester to cultures of the ΔcysG mutant strain. LC-MS analysis of the respective extracts revealed that the production of cystargolides was restored only in the supplemented cultures (Figs. 3, S9 and S10). Chemical complementation was not observed after feeding with non-methylated 3-IPM, demonstrating the importance of the installed 1-methyl group for the subsequent biosynthetic steps in cystargolide biosynthesis. Next, we wanted to confirm that the CysG in vitro product is a genuine intermediate in the cystargolide pathway. Therefore, we fed 3-IPM-1-methyl-ester to cultures of the ΔcysG mutant strain. LC-MS analysis of the respective extracts revealed that the production of cystargolides was restored only in the supplemented cultures (Figs. 3, S9 and S10). Chemical complementation was not observed after feeding with non-methylated 3-IPM, demonstrating the importance of the installed 1-methyl group for the subsequent biosynthetic steps in cystargolide biosynthesis. Next, we wanted to confirm that the CysG in vitro product is a genuine intermediate in the cystargolide pathway. Therefore, we fed 3-IPM-1-methyl-ester to cultures of the ΔcysG mutant strain. LC-MS analysis of the respective extracts revealed that the production of cystargolides was restored only in the supplemented cultures (Figs. 3, S9 and S10). Chemical complementation was not observed after feeding with non-methylated 3-IPM, demonstrating the importance of the installed 1-methyl group for the subsequent biosynthetic steps in cystargolide biosynthesis. Our unexpected findings on the role of CysG in cystargolide formation prompted us to examine if the homologous enzyme BelI has a similar function in belactosin biosynthesis. Therefore, we cloned and overexpressed belI in E. coli BL21(DE3) to obtain pure and soluble recombinant protein with an N-terminal His6-SUMO-tag (Fig. S8). Because the predicted substrate of BelI 3-sec butylmalate, was not commercially available we accessed this compound by chemical synthesis using diethyl malate and 2-iodobutane as starting materials (32, 33). In the next step, BelI was incubated with SAM and authentic 3-sec butylmalate to provide a single product peak in LC-MS chromatograms (Fig. 4B). The respective molecular ion had a mass-to-charge ratio of m/z 202.69 [M + H]+, matching the expected mono-methylated 3-sec butylmalate. A similar compound was not identified in the control assays lacking either BelI or SAM. These results clearly showed that the biosynthesis of the β-lactone warhead moiety of cystargolides and belactosins proceeds via a cryptic methylated intermediate prior to cyclization. Our unexpected findings on the role of CysG in cystargolide formation prompted us to examine if the homologous enzyme BelI has a similar function in belactosin biosynthesis. Therefore, we cloned and overexpressed belI in E. coli BL21(DE3) to obtain pure and soluble recombinant protein with an N-terminal His6-SUMO-tag (Fig. S8). Because the predicted substrate of BelI 3-sec butylmalate, was not commercially available we accessed this compound by chemical synthesis using diethyl malate and 2-iodobutane as starting materials (32, 33). In the next step, BelI was incubated with SAM and authentic 3-sec butylmalate to provide a single product peak in LC-MS chromatograms (Fig. 4B). The respective molecular ion had a mass-to-charge ratio of m/z 202.69 [M + H]+, matching the expected mono-methylated 3-sec butylmalate. A similar compound was not identified in the control assays lacking either BelI or SAM. These results clearly showed that the biosynthesis of the β-lactone warhead moiety of cystargolides and belactosins proceeds via a cryptic methylated intermediate prior to cyclization. Our unexpected findings on the role of CysG in cystargolide formation prompted us to examine if the homologous enzyme BelI has a similar function in belactosin biosynthesis. Therefore, we cloned and overexpressed belI in E. coli BL21(DE3) to obtain pure and soluble recombinant protein with an N-terminal His6-SUMO-tag (Fig. S8). Because the predicted substrate of BelI 3-sec butylmalate, was not commercially available we accessed this compound by chemical synthesis using diethyl malate and 2-iodobutane as starting materials (32, 33). In the next step, BelI was incubated with SAM and authentic 3-sec butylmalate to provide a single product peak in LC-MS chromatograms (Fig. 4B). The respective molecular ion had a mass-to-charge ratio of m/z 202.69 [M + H]+, matching the expected mono-methylated 3-sec butylmalate. A similar compound was not identified in the control assays lacking either BelI or SAM. These results clearly showed that the biosynthesis of the β-lactone warhead moiety of cystargolides and belactosins proceeds via a cryptic methylated intermediate prior to cyclization. Discussion Discussion In this study we identified and isolated a cystargolide gene cluster from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309. The cluster contains eight genes, which are homologs of the original cys BGC from K. cystarginea NRRL B16505. Via heterologous expression, we could unambiguously connect this BGC to the biosynthesis of cystargolides, confirming that it contains all genes necessary for the production of cystargolide A and B. Furthermore, we were able to demonstrate that the genes cysC-cysG are essential for this process. The putative methyltransferase CysG readily methylated 3-IPM in vitro, suggesting that it catalyzes the same reaction in the cystargolide biosynthetic pathway and plays a crucial role in the formation of the β-lactone warhead. The methylation occurs at the C-1 carboxylic acid group of 3-IPM as revealed by NMR spectroscopy, proving that this modification is not involved in the lactonization. Thus we propose that CysG might act as a diverter, committing the primary metabolite 3-IPM to cystargolide biosynthesis and/or masking the 1-carboxylic acid group for the following biotransformations. These findings were supported by the functional characterization of the CysG homolog BelI. BelI catalyzed the methylation of 3-sec butylmalate in a SAM-dependent manner. Intriguingly, CysG and CysE as well as BelI and BelR exhibit conserved protein domains that are found in the methyltransferase/methylesterase pair BioC/BioH of the biotin synthesis pathway in proteobacteria (Figs. S1 and S2) (34). BioC catalyzes a SAM-dependent methyl esterification of malonyl-ACP allowing its recognition as a starter unit by house-keeping charge-sensitive fatty acid synthetases. After two reiterations of the fatty acid elongation cycle, the generated pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester is hydrolyzed to pimeloyl-ACP and methanol by BioH. Pimeloyl-ACP is then further converted to biotin. One might speculate about a similar role for CysG and CysE in cystargolide biosynthesis. In this reaction trajectory the 3-IPM-1-methyl-ester product of CysG would undergo lactonization to afford a β-lactone methyl ester building block. Prior to amidation, the 1-carboxyl group is presumably liberated by CysE. Investigations to explore this hypothesis and open questions about the formation of the β-lactone warhead of cystargolides and belactosins will be addressed in future studies. In this study we identified and isolated a cystargolide gene cluster from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309. The cluster contains eight genes, which are homologs of the original cys BGC from K. cystarginea NRRL B16505. Via heterologous expression, we could unambiguously connect this BGC to the biosynthesis of cystargolides, confirming that it contains all genes necessary for the production of cystargolide A and B. Furthermore, we were able to demonstrate that the genes cysC-cysG are essential for this process. The putative methyltransferase CysG readily methylated 3-IPM in vitro, suggesting that it catalyzes the same reaction in the cystargolide biosynthetic pathway and plays a crucial role in the formation of the β-lactone warhead. The methylation occurs at the C-1 carboxylic acid group of 3-IPM as revealed by NMR spectroscopy, proving that this modification is not involved in the lactonization. Thus we propose that CysG might act as a diverter, committing the primary metabolite 3-IPM to cystargolide biosynthesis and/or masking the 1-carboxylic acid group for the following biotransformations. These findings were supported by the functional characterization of the CysG homolog BelI. BelI catalyzed the methylation of 3-sec butylmalate in a SAM-dependent manner. Intriguingly, CysG and CysE as well as BelI and BelR exhibit conserved protein domains that are found in the methyltransferase/methylesterase pair BioC/BioH of the biotin synthesis pathway in proteobacteria (Figs. S1 and S2) (34). BioC catalyzes a SAM-dependent methyl esterification of malonyl-ACP allowing its recognition as a starter unit by house-keeping charge-sensitive fatty acid synthetases. After two reiterations of the fatty acid elongation cycle, the generated pimeloyl-ACP methyl ester is hydrolyzed to pimeloyl-ACP and methanol by BioH. Pimeloyl-ACP is then further converted to biotin. One might speculate about a similar role for CysG and CysE in cystargolide biosynthesis. In this reaction trajectory the 3-IPM-1-methyl-ester product of CysG would undergo lactonization to afford a β-lactone methyl ester building block. Prior to amidation, the 1-carboxyl group is presumably liberated by CysE. Investigations to explore this hypothesis and open questions about the formation of the β-lactone warhead of cystargolides and belactosins will be addressed in future studies. Experimental procedures Experimental procedures General experiments General experiments General experiments Chemicals, micro-, and molecular biological agents were acquired from standard commercial sources. S. coelicolor M512 and its derivatives were grown and maintained on MS agar (2% (w/v) soy flour purchased from Sobo Naturkost, 2% (w/v) mannitol purchased from Roth, 2% (w/v) agar purchased from Becton Dickinson) (35). Liquid cultures were either cultivated in Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB) medium (purchased from Becton Dickinson) or in SM1 Medium (10% (w/v) soy flour, 18% glucose, 1% Na2SO4 and 0.2% CaCO3). E. coli strains were grown in lysogeny broth (LB) medium supplemented with appropriate antibiotics. DNA isolation and manipulations were carried out according to standard methods for E. coli (36) and Streptomyces (35). Chemicals, micro-, and molecular biological agents were acquired from standard commercial sources. S. coelicolor M512 and its derivatives were grown and maintained on MS agar (2% (w/v) soy flour purchased from Sobo Naturkost, 2% (w/v) mannitol purchased from Roth, 2% (w/v) agar purchased from Becton Dickinson) (35). Liquid cultures were either cultivated in Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB) medium (purchased from Becton Dickinson) or in SM1 Medium (10% (w/v) soy flour, 18% glucose, 1% Na2SO4 and 0.2% CaCO3). E. coli strains were grown in lysogeny broth (LB) medium supplemented with appropriate antibiotics. DNA isolation and manipulations were carried out according to standard methods for E. coli (36) and Streptomyces (35). Chemicals, micro-, and molecular biological agents were acquired from standard commercial sources. S. coelicolor M512 and its derivatives were grown and maintained on MS agar (2% (w/v) soy flour purchased from Sobo Naturkost, 2% (w/v) mannitol purchased from Roth, 2% (w/v) agar purchased from Becton Dickinson) (35). Liquid cultures were either cultivated in Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB) medium (purchased from Becton Dickinson) or in SM1 Medium (10% (w/v) soy flour, 18% glucose, 1% Na2SO4 and 0.2% CaCO3). E. coli strains were grown in lysogeny broth (LB) medium supplemented with appropriate antibiotics. DNA isolation and manipulations were carried out according to standard methods for E. coli (36) and Streptomyces (35). Human proteasome inhibition assay Human proteasome inhibition assay Human proteasome inhibition assay The 20S human proteasome activity was analyzed using the chymotryptic model substrate LLVY-AMC (Bachem). LLVY-AMC was prediluted in assay buffer to a concentration of 50 μM (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.8, 0.5 mM EDTA/0.035% SDS), and varying dilutions of culture extracts (1:300 and 1:600) were added. The reaction was started by the addition of the human proteasome (Enzo Life Sciences: BML-PW8720-0050) to a final concentration of 0.4 μg/ml at a reaction volume of 100 μl to monitor substrate conversion. The fluorescence was followed over time in a spectrofluorometer (Tecan Spark, Tecan Trading AG) at λex = 380 nm and λem = 460 nm. All measurements were performed in triplicates and two independent experiments were performed. The 20S human proteasome activity was analyzed using the chymotryptic model substrate LLVY-AMC (Bachem). LLVY-AMC was prediluted in assay buffer to a concentration of 50 μM (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.8, 0.5 mM EDTA/0.035% SDS), and varying dilutions of culture extracts (1:300 and 1:600) were added. The reaction was started by the addition of the human proteasome (Enzo Life Sciences: BML-PW8720-0050) to a final concentration of 0.4 μg/ml at a reaction volume of 100 μl to monitor substrate conversion. The fluorescence was followed over time in a spectrofluorometer (Tecan Spark, Tecan Trading AG) at λex = 380 nm and λem = 460 nm. All measurements were performed in triplicates and two independent experiments were performed. The 20S human proteasome activity was analyzed using the chymotryptic model substrate LLVY-AMC (Bachem). LLVY-AMC was prediluted in assay buffer to a concentration of 50 μM (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.8, 0.5 mM EDTA/0.035% SDS), and varying dilutions of culture extracts (1:300 and 1:600) were added. The reaction was started by the addition of the human proteasome (Enzo Life Sciences: BML-PW8720-0050) to a final concentration of 0.4 μg/ml at a reaction volume of 100 μl to monitor substrate conversion. The fluorescence was followed over time in a spectrofluorometer (Tecan Spark, Tecan Trading AG) at λex = 380 nm and λem = 460 nm. All measurements were performed in triplicates and two independent experiments were performed. TAR-cloning TAR-cloning TAR-cloning The vector pCAP03-acc(3)IV was used to isolate the cys BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 creating cysDM02 following published transformation-assisted recombination protocols (21). Therefore, homologous hooks of 299 bp (Table S3) were integrated in pCAP03-acc(3)IV by Gibson assembly. The vector was linearized by restriction digest with XhoI and NdeI. For the preparation of spheroplasts S. cerevisiae VL6-48N was cultured in 50 ml YPD medium (20 g/L peptone, 20 g/L glucose, 10 g/L yeast extract) with 1% (w/v) adenine 2% (w/v) glucose until an OD660 of 3.0 was reached. The cells were harvested at 4 °C and 2000g for 5 min and resuspended in 30 ml H2O. After another centrifugation step at 3000g the pellet was resuspended in 20 ml ice-cold 1 M D-sorbit. The cells were incubated on ice for 30 min, centrifuged at 4 °C and 3000g for 5 min and resuspended in 20 ml SPE solution. 125 μl zymolyase and 40 μl β-mercaptoethanol were added and the suspension was incubated at 30 °C and 200 rpm until spheroplast generation was complete. Progress was monitored by measuring the OD660 of 100 μl cells diluted with 900 μl 1M D-sorbit solution. The measurements were compared to the OD660 of 100 μl cells diluted in a 2% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution. The vector pCAP03-acc(3)IV was used to isolate the cys BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 creating cysDM02 following published transformation-assisted recombination protocols (21). Therefore, homologous hooks of 299 bp (Table S3) were integrated in pCAP03-acc(3)IV by Gibson assembly. The vector was linearized by restriction digest with XhoI and NdeI. For the preparation of spheroplasts S. cerevisiae VL6-48N was cultured in 50 ml YPD medium (20 g/L peptone, 20 g/L glucose, 10 g/L yeast extract) with 1% (w/v) adenine 2% (w/v) glucose until an OD660 of 3.0 was reached. The cells were harvested at 4 °C and 2000g for 5 min and resuspended in 30 ml H2O. After another centrifugation step at 3000g the pellet was resuspended in 20 ml ice-cold 1 M D-sorbit. The cells were incubated on ice for 30 min, centrifuged at 4 °C and 3000g for 5 min and resuspended in 20 ml SPE solution. 125 μl zymolyase and 40 μl β-mercaptoethanol were added and the suspension was incubated at 30 °C and 200 rpm until spheroplast generation was complete. Progress was monitored by measuring the OD660 of 100 μl cells diluted with 900 μl 1M D-sorbit solution. The measurements were compared to the OD660 of 100 μl cells diluted in a 2% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution. The vector pCAP03-acc(3)IV was used to isolate the cys BGC from S. durhamensis NRRL-B3309 creating cysDM02 following published transformation-assisted recombination protocols (21). Therefore, homologous hooks of 299 bp (Table S3) were integrated in pCAP03-acc(3)IV by Gibson assembly. The vector was linearized by restriction digest with XhoI and NdeI. For the preparation of spheroplasts S. cerevisiae VL6-48N was cultured in 50 ml YPD medium (20 g/L peptone, 20 g/L glucose, 10 g/L yeast extract) with 1% (w/v) adenine 2% (w/v) glucose until an OD660 of 3.0 was reached. The cells were harvested at 4 °C and 2000g for 5 min and resuspended in 30 ml H2O. After another centrifugation step at 3000g the pellet was resuspended in 20 ml ice-cold 1 M D-sorbit. The cells were incubated on ice for 30 min, centrifuged at 4 °C and 3000g for 5 min and resuspended in 20 ml SPE solution. 125 μl zymolyase and 40 μl β-mercaptoethanol were added and the suspension was incubated at 30 °C and 200 rpm until spheroplast generation was complete. Progress was monitored by measuring the OD660 of 100 μl cells diluted with 900 μl 1M D-sorbit solution. The measurements were compared to the OD660 of 100 μl cells diluted in a 2% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution. Construction of deletion mutants Construction of deletion mutants Construction of deletion mutants Single gene knockouts in the cys BGC were generated by PCR-targeting using λ-RED recombineering (23). Therefore, an apramycin resistance cassette was amplified and extended from pIJ773 by PCR (Table S5 and Fig. S4). The PCR product was transferred into E. coli BW25113/pKD46 containing fosmid cysDM02 (37). After confirmation with restriction analysis, the resistance cassette was removed in E. coli BT340 to avoid polar effects taking advantage of the flanking FLP/FRT recognition site (38). The resulting construct was transferred into E. coli ET12567 (39) and introduced into S. coelicolor M512, by triparental mating with the help of E. coli pUB307 (40). Three independent kanamycin-resistant clones were selected for each experiment and designated S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02A (ΔcysA) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02B (ΔcysB) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02C (ΔcysC) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02D (ΔcysD) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02E (ΔcysE) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02F (ΔcysF) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02G (ΔcysG) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02H (ΔcysH) 1–3. Successful integration of the clusters into the S. coelicolor M512 genome was confirmed by PCR (Table S4). Single gene knockouts in the cys BGC were generated by PCR-targeting using λ-RED recombineering (23). Therefore, an apramycin resistance cassette was amplified and extended from pIJ773 by PCR (Table S5 and Fig. S4). The PCR product was transferred into E. coli BW25113/pKD46 containing fosmid cysDM02 (37). After confirmation with restriction analysis, the resistance cassette was removed in E. coli BT340 to avoid polar effects taking advantage of the flanking FLP/FRT recognition site (38). The resulting construct was transferred into E. coli ET12567 (39) and introduced into S. coelicolor M512, by triparental mating with the help of E. coli pUB307 (40). Three independent kanamycin-resistant clones were selected for each experiment and designated S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02A (ΔcysA) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02B (ΔcysB) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02C (ΔcysC) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02D (ΔcysD) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02E (ΔcysE) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02F (ΔcysF) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02G (ΔcysG) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02H (ΔcysH) 1–3. Successful integration of the clusters into the S. coelicolor M512 genome was confirmed by PCR (Table S4). Single gene knockouts in the cys BGC were generated by PCR-targeting using λ-RED recombineering (23). Therefore, an apramycin resistance cassette was amplified and extended from pIJ773 by PCR (Table S5 and Fig. S4). The PCR product was transferred into E. coli BW25113/pKD46 containing fosmid cysDM02 (37). After confirmation with restriction analysis, the resistance cassette was removed in E. coli BT340 to avoid polar effects taking advantage of the flanking FLP/FRT recognition site (38). The resulting construct was transferred into E. coli ET12567 (39) and introduced into S. coelicolor M512, by triparental mating with the help of E. coli pUB307 (40). Three independent kanamycin-resistant clones were selected for each experiment and designated S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02A (ΔcysA) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02B (ΔcysB) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02C (ΔcysC) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02D (ΔcysD) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02E (ΔcysE) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02F (ΔcysF) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02G (ΔcysG) 1–3, S. coelicolor M512/cysDM02H (ΔcysH) 1–3. Successful integration of the clusters into the S. coelicolor M512 genome was confirmed by PCR (Table S4). Heterologous production of cystargolides Heterologous production of cystargolides Heterologous production of cystargolides For the heterologous production of cystargolides, 50 ml of TSB medium were inoculated with 10 μl spore suspension of S. coelicolor M512 derivatives and cultivated for 48 h at 30 °C and 200 rpm with appropriate antibiotics. 1 ml of pre-culture was transferred to 50 ml SM1 (41). Cells were cultivated for 7 days at 30 °C, 200 rpm and extracted as described below. For the heterologous production of cystargolides, 50 ml of TSB medium were inoculated with 10 μl spore suspension of S. coelicolor M512 derivatives and cultivated for 48 h at 30 °C and 200 rpm with appropriate antibiotics. 1 ml of pre-culture was transferred to 50 ml SM1 (41). Cells were cultivated for 7 days at 30 °C, 200 rpm and extracted as described below. For the heterologous production of cystargolides, 50 ml of TSB medium were inoculated with 10 μl spore suspension of S. coelicolor M512 derivatives and cultivated for 48 h at 30 °C and 200 rpm with appropriate antibiotics. 1 ml of pre-culture was transferred to 50 ml SM1 (41). Cells were cultivated for 7 days at 30 °C, 200 rpm and extracted as described below. Extraction and analysis of cystargolides Extraction and analysis of cystargolides Extraction and analysis of cystargolides For the extraction of cystargolide, 750 μl of cell culture was thoroughly mixed with the same volume of ethyl acetate (EtOAc), followed by separation of the phases by centrifugation at 1500g for 5 min. The organic phase was collected and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. The extracts were dissolved in acetonitrile (MeCN) and subjected to LC–MS analysis. The routine analysis of culture extracts by LC–MS and MS/MS was performed on a LC/MSD Ultra Trap System XCT6330 (Agilent 1200 series; Agilent Technologies). Samples (2.5 μl) were injected onto a reverse phase column (Nucleosil 100-3 C18, particle size 3 μm, pore size 100 Å, 100 × 2 mm fitted with a precolumn 10 × 2 mm) at a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min and a linear gradient of solvent B from t0 = 0% to t15 = 100% (solvent A: water with 0.1% formic acid, solvent B: MeCN with 0.06% formic acid) for cystargolide A and B detection. Ionization and mass analysis was performed by ESI (positive and negative ionization) in Ultra Scan mode with a capillary voltage of 3.5 kV and a drying gas temperature of 350 °C. For the extraction of cystargolide, 750 μl of cell culture was thoroughly mixed with the same volume of ethyl acetate (EtOAc), followed by separation of the phases by centrifugation at 1500g for 5 min. The organic phase was collected and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. The extracts were dissolved in acetonitrile (MeCN) and subjected to LC–MS analysis. The routine analysis of culture extracts by LC–MS and MS/MS was performed on a LC/MSD Ultra Trap System XCT6330 (Agilent 1200 series; Agilent Technologies). Samples (2.5 μl) were injected onto a reverse phase column (Nucleosil 100-3 C18, particle size 3 μm, pore size 100 Å, 100 × 2 mm fitted with a precolumn 10 × 2 mm) at a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min and a linear gradient of solvent B from t0 = 0% to t15 = 100% (solvent A: water with 0.1% formic acid, solvent B: MeCN with 0.06% formic acid) for cystargolide A and B detection. Ionization and mass analysis was performed by ESI (positive and negative ionization) in Ultra Scan mode with a capillary voltage of 3.5 kV and a drying gas temperature of 350 °C. For the extraction of cystargolide, 750 μl of cell culture was thoroughly mixed with the same volume of ethyl acetate (EtOAc), followed by separation of the phases by centrifugation at 1500g for 5 min. The organic phase was collected and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. The extracts were dissolved in acetonitrile (MeCN) and subjected to LC–MS analysis. The routine analysis of culture extracts by LC–MS and MS/MS was performed on a LC/MSD Ultra Trap System XCT6330 (Agilent 1200 series; Agilent Technologies). Samples (2.5 μl) were injected onto a reverse phase column (Nucleosil 100-3 C18, particle size 3 μm, pore size 100 Å, 100 × 2 mm fitted with a precolumn 10 × 2 mm) at a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min and a linear gradient of solvent B from t0 = 0% to t15 = 100% (solvent A: water with 0.1% formic acid, solvent B: MeCN with 0.06% formic acid) for cystargolide A and B detection. Ionization and mass analysis was performed by ESI (positive and negative ionization) in Ultra Scan mode with a capillary voltage of 3.5 kV and a drying gas temperature of 350 °C. NMR analysis NMR analysis NMR analysis NMR solvents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. 1D and 2D NMR spectra were acquired either with a Bruker Avance III HD 400 MHz NMR spectrometer, using a 5 mm SMART probe head, or with a Bruker Avance III HDX spectrometer 700 MHz NMR spectrometer (Bruker BioSpin GmbH, Rheinstetten, Germany), equipped with a 5 mm Prodigy TCI CryoProbe head. NMR spectra were measured in d6-DMSO at 293 K and were referenced to residual solvent signals (d6-DMSO: δH = 2.50 and δC = 39.5 ppm). NMR solvents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. 1D and 2D NMR spectra were acquired either with a Bruker Avance III HD 400 MHz NMR spectrometer, using a 5 mm SMART probe head, or with a Bruker Avance III HDX spectrometer 700 MHz NMR spectrometer (Bruker BioSpin GmbH, Rheinstetten, Germany), equipped with a 5 mm Prodigy TCI CryoProbe head. NMR spectra were measured in d6-DMSO at 293 K and were referenced to residual solvent signals (d6-DMSO: δH = 2.50 and δC = 39.5 ppm). NMR solvents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. 1D and 2D NMR spectra were acquired either with a Bruker Avance III HD 400 MHz NMR spectrometer, using a 5 mm SMART probe head, or with a Bruker Avance III HDX spectrometer 700 MHz NMR spectrometer (Bruker BioSpin GmbH, Rheinstetten, Germany), equipped with a 5 mm Prodigy TCI CryoProbe head. NMR spectra were measured in d6-DMSO at 293 K and were referenced to residual solvent signals (d6-DMSO: δH = 2.50 and δC = 39.5 ppm). Cloning, expression, and purification of CysG Cloning, expression, and purification of CysG Cloning, expression, and purification of CysG The gene cysG was amplified from the genomic DNA of K. cystarginea. The PCR product was cloned into pET15b containing an N-terminal 6xHis-tag. The resulting plasmid pET15b-cysG was verified by sequencing (Eurofins genomics) and transferred into E. coli Rosetta (DE3) pLysS by electroporation. A single colony was inoculated in 10 ml LB medium containing 50 μg/ml ampicillin and cultivated at 220 rpm and 37 °C until an OD600 of approximately 0.6 was reached. This preculture was used to inoculate 1 L LB medium containing 50 μg/ml ampicillin, which was grown to an OD600 of approximately 0.6. The expression of His6-CysG was induced by the addition of Isopropyl β–d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) to a final concentration of 0.5 mM and the culture was cultivated overnight at 250 rpm and 20 °C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (4000g, 5 min, 4 °C) and resuspended in 25 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 10%(v/v) glycerol, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 1% (v/v) TWEEN 20, 20 mM imidazole, 0.5 mg/ml lysozyme, 0.5 mM PMSF). Cell lysis was performed by sonication for 10 min (ultrasonic disintegrator set to amp 30%, pulse 5s/5s rest). The suspension was centrifuged (18,000 rpm, 45 min, 4 °C) and the soluble fraction was filtered (0.2 μM pore size). IMAC purification was performed by fast protein liquid chromatography (ÄKTA Start) with a 5 ml HisTrap Ni-NTA column (GE Healthcare). The column was washed with 8 column volumes (CV) of binding buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 20 mM imidazole) and eluted with 9 CVs of elution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 250 mM imidazole) using a gradient increasing from 0% to 100%. Protein purity was determined by SDS-PAGE. Buffer exchange and concentration of proteins were performed with Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal units. The gene cysG was amplified from the genomic DNA of K. cystarginea. The PCR product was cloned into pET15b containing an N-terminal 6xHis-tag. The resulting plasmid pET15b-cysG was verified by sequencing (Eurofins genomics) and transferred into E. coli Rosetta (DE3) pLysS by electroporation. A single colony was inoculated in 10 ml LB medium containing 50 μg/ml ampicillin and cultivated at 220 rpm and 37 °C until an OD600 of approximately 0.6 was reached. This preculture was used to inoculate 1 L LB medium containing 50 μg/ml ampicillin, which was grown to an OD600 of approximately 0.6. The expression of His6-CysG was induced by the addition of Isopropyl β–d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) to a final concentration of 0.5 mM and the culture was cultivated overnight at 250 rpm and 20 °C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (4000g, 5 min, 4 °C) and resuspended in 25 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 10%(v/v) glycerol, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 1% (v/v) TWEEN 20, 20 mM imidazole, 0.5 mg/ml lysozyme, 0.5 mM PMSF). Cell lysis was performed by sonication for 10 min (ultrasonic disintegrator set to amp 30%, pulse 5s/5s rest). The suspension was centrifuged (18,000 rpm, 45 min, 4 °C) and the soluble fraction was filtered (0.2 μM pore size). IMAC purification was performed by fast protein liquid chromatography (ÄKTA Start) with a 5 ml HisTrap Ni-NTA column (GE Healthcare). The column was washed with 8 column volumes (CV) of binding buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 20 mM imidazole) and eluted with 9 CVs of elution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 250 mM imidazole) using a gradient increasing from 0% to 100%. Protein purity was determined by SDS-PAGE. Buffer exchange and concentration of proteins were performed with Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal units. The gene cysG was amplified from the genomic DNA of K. cystarginea. The PCR product was cloned into pET15b containing an N-terminal 6xHis-tag. The resulting plasmid pET15b-cysG was verified by sequencing (Eurofins genomics) and transferred into E. coli Rosetta (DE3) pLysS by electroporation. A single colony was inoculated in 10 ml LB medium containing 50 μg/ml ampicillin and cultivated at 220 rpm and 37 °C until an OD600 of approximately 0.6 was reached. This preculture was used to inoculate 1 L LB medium containing 50 μg/ml ampicillin, which was grown to an OD600 of approximately 0.6. The expression of His6-CysG was induced by the addition of Isopropyl β–d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) to a final concentration of 0.5 mM and the culture was cultivated overnight at 250 rpm and 20 °C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (4000g, 5 min, 4 °C) and resuspended in 25 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 10%(v/v) glycerol, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 1% (v/v) TWEEN 20, 20 mM imidazole, 0.5 mg/ml lysozyme, 0.5 mM PMSF). Cell lysis was performed by sonication for 10 min (ultrasonic disintegrator set to amp 30%, pulse 5s/5s rest). The suspension was centrifuged (18,000 rpm, 45 min, 4 °C) and the soluble fraction was filtered (0.2 μM pore size). IMAC purification was performed by fast protein liquid chromatography (ÄKTA Start) with a 5 ml HisTrap Ni-NTA column (GE Healthcare). The column was washed with 8 column volumes (CV) of binding buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 20 mM imidazole) and eluted with 9 CVs of elution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 250 mM imidazole) using a gradient increasing from 0% to 100%. Protein purity was determined by SDS-PAGE. Buffer exchange and concentration of proteins were performed with Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal units. Cloning, expression, and purification of BelI Cloning, expression, and purification of BelI Cloning, expression, and purification of BelI The synthetic gene fragment optimized for E. coli codon usage of BelI (GenBank ARO49577.1) was cloned into a pETDuet expression vector modified to encode an N-terminal His6-SUMO tag using NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly following the manufacturer’s instructions. Correct insertion was verified by Sanger sequencing (Eurofins genomics). E. coli BL21(DE3) cells were transformed by electroporation and grown in glass shake flasks containing 2 L lysogenic broth with 100 μg/ml ampicillin at 37  °C. After reaching an optical density measured at a wavelength of 600 nm (OD600) of 0.6, flasks were stored at 4  °C for 30 min before adding 0.5 mM isopropyl-β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (final concentration) to induce protein expression, which occurred overnight at 20  °C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed with 0.9% (w/v) NaCl and cell pellets stored at −20  °C until further use. E. coli cell pellets of 10 g were dissolved in 50 ml buffer A (100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) and lysed by sonication (Branson Digital Sonifier 250). After centrifugation (40,000g, 4  °C, 30 min), the supernatant was applied to a 5 ml HisTrap HP column at a flow rate of 5 ml/min with an ÄKTA Pure system (Cytiva), previously equilibrated with buffer A. After washing with buffer A, the protein of interest was eluted by applying a 50 ml linear gradient from buffer A to buffer B (100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole, 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol). Fractions containing protein were pooled and supplemented with SUMO-protease to remove the His6-SUMO-tag and dialyzed overnight at 4 °C against buffer C (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol). HisTrap affinity chromatography was repeated and the flow-through was concentrated to 4 ml using Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filters. Centrifugation (16,000g, 4  °C, 15 min) removed residual protein aggregates, and the supernatant was used for size exclusion chromatography with a HiLoad Superose 6 pg 16/600 column in buffer D (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM dithiothreitol) at 1.0 ml/min. High purity peak fractions were pooled and concentrated to at least 10 mg/ml. The synthetic gene fragment optimized for E. coli codon usage of BelI (GenBank ARO49577.1) was cloned into a pETDuet expression vector modified to encode an N-terminal His6-SUMO tag using NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly following the manufacturer’s instructions. Correct insertion was verified by Sanger sequencing (Eurofins genomics). E. coli BL21(DE3) cells were transformed by electroporation and grown in glass shake flasks containing 2 L lysogenic broth with 100 μg/ml ampicillin at 37  °C. After reaching an optical density measured at a wavelength of 600 nm (OD600) of 0.6, flasks were stored at 4  °C for 30 min before adding 0.5 mM isopropyl-β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (final concentration) to induce protein expression, which occurred overnight at 20  °C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed with 0.9% (w/v) NaCl and cell pellets stored at −20  °C until further use. E. coli cell pellets of 10 g were dissolved in 50 ml buffer A (100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) and lysed by sonication (Branson Digital Sonifier 250). After centrifugation (40,000g, 4  °C, 30 min), the supernatant was applied to a 5 ml HisTrap HP column at a flow rate of 5 ml/min with an ÄKTA Pure system (Cytiva), previously equilibrated with buffer A. After washing with buffer A, the protein of interest was eluted by applying a 50 ml linear gradient from buffer A to buffer B (100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole, 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol). Fractions containing protein were pooled and supplemented with SUMO-protease to remove the His6-SUMO-tag and dialyzed overnight at 4 °C against buffer C (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol). HisTrap affinity chromatography was repeated and the flow-through was concentrated to 4 ml using Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filters. Centrifugation (16,000g, 4  °C, 15 min) removed residual protein aggregates, and the supernatant was used for size exclusion chromatography with a HiLoad Superose 6 pg 16/600 column in buffer D (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM dithiothreitol) at 1.0 ml/min. High purity peak fractions were pooled and concentrated to at least 10 mg/ml. The synthetic gene fragment optimized for E. coli codon usage of BelI (GenBank ARO49577.1) was cloned into a pETDuet expression vector modified to encode an N-terminal His6-SUMO tag using NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly following the manufacturer’s instructions. Correct insertion was verified by Sanger sequencing (Eurofins genomics). E. coli BL21(DE3) cells were transformed by electroporation and grown in glass shake flasks containing 2 L lysogenic broth with 100 μg/ml ampicillin at 37  °C. After reaching an optical density measured at a wavelength of 600 nm (OD600) of 0.6, flasks were stored at 4  °C for 30 min before adding 0.5 mM isopropyl-β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (final concentration) to induce protein expression, which occurred overnight at 20  °C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed with 0.9% (w/v) NaCl and cell pellets stored at −20  °C until further use. E. coli cell pellets of 10 g were dissolved in 50 ml buffer A (100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) and lysed by sonication (Branson Digital Sonifier 250). After centrifugation (40,000g, 4  °C, 30 min), the supernatant was applied to a 5 ml HisTrap HP column at a flow rate of 5 ml/min with an ÄKTA Pure system (Cytiva), previously equilibrated with buffer A. After washing with buffer A, the protein of interest was eluted by applying a 50 ml linear gradient from buffer A to buffer B (100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole, 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol). Fractions containing protein were pooled and supplemented with SUMO-protease to remove the His6-SUMO-tag and dialyzed overnight at 4 °C against buffer C (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol). HisTrap affinity chromatography was repeated and the flow-through was concentrated to 4 ml using Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filters. Centrifugation (16,000g, 4  °C, 15 min) removed residual protein aggregates, and the supernatant was used for size exclusion chromatography with a HiLoad Superose 6 pg 16/600 column in buffer D (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM dithiothreitol) at 1.0 ml/min. High purity peak fractions were pooled and concentrated to at least 10 mg/ml. Chemical synthesis Chemical synthesis Chemical synthesis Standard laboratory glassware and equipment were used to carry out all experiments. All chemicals and solvents (technical, dry, deuterated, HPLC grade, and MS grade) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Carl Roth or Acros and used without further purification. Removal of volatiles was implemented on a BUCHI Rotavapor R-215 with a Thermo Haake K10/DC10 cooling system. The ambient temperature was between 22 to 23 °C. Purifications of chemical products were performed on a BUCHI Pure C-815 Flash Chromatography System using appropriate FlashPure EcoFlex Silica cartridges and solvents. Analytical thin-layer chromatography was performed on aluminium-coated TLC silica gel plates (silica gel 60, F254, Merck). For visualization, ultra-violet irradiation (λ = 254, 366 nm) and/or staining using potassium permanganate solution (3.0 g KMnO4, 20.0 g K2CO3, and 5 ml 5% NaOH in 300 ml ddH2O) with subsequent heat treatment were used. Standard laboratory glassware and equipment were used to carry out all experiments. All chemicals and solvents (technical, dry, deuterated, HPLC grade, and MS grade) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Carl Roth or Acros and used without further purification. Removal of volatiles was implemented on a BUCHI Rotavapor R-215 with a Thermo Haake K10/DC10 cooling system. The ambient temperature was between 22 to 23 °C. Purifications of chemical products were performed on a BUCHI Pure C-815 Flash Chromatography System using appropriate FlashPure EcoFlex Silica cartridges and solvents. Analytical thin-layer chromatography was performed on aluminium-coated TLC silica gel plates (silica gel 60, F254, Merck). For visualization, ultra-violet irradiation (λ = 254, 366 nm) and/or staining using potassium permanganate solution (3.0 g KMnO4, 20.0 g K2CO3, and 5 ml 5% NaOH in 300 ml ddH2O) with subsequent heat treatment were used. Standard laboratory glassware and equipment were used to carry out all experiments. All chemicals and solvents (technical, dry, deuterated, HPLC grade, and MS grade) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Carl Roth or Acros and used without further purification. Removal of volatiles was implemented on a BUCHI Rotavapor R-215 with a Thermo Haake K10/DC10 cooling system. The ambient temperature was between 22 to 23 °C. Purifications of chemical products were performed on a BUCHI Pure C-815 Flash Chromatography System using appropriate FlashPure EcoFlex Silica cartridges and solvents. Analytical thin-layer chromatography was performed on aluminium-coated TLC silica gel plates (silica gel 60, F254, Merck). For visualization, ultra-violet irradiation (λ = 254, 366 nm) and/or staining using potassium permanganate solution (3.0 g KMnO4, 20.0 g K2CO3, and 5 ml 5% NaOH in 300 ml ddH2O) with subsequent heat treatment were used. MS-measurements were recorded on an Agilent Infinity II 1290 LCMS system equipped with a Single Quadrupol MS (6100 series, AJS ion source) and a C18-column (Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 1.9 μm, 2.1 × 100 mm) using a 5 to 95% H2O-acetonitrile (ACN) gradient over 10 min with a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min. Solvents were supplemented with 0.1% formic acid. The applied scan range was m/z 100 to 2000 in positive and negative mode. MS-measurements were recorded on an Agilent Infinity II 1290 LCMS system equipped with a Single Quadrupol MS (6100 series, AJS ion source) and a C18-column (Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 1.9 μm, 2.1 × 100 mm) using a 5 to 95% H2O-acetonitrile (ACN) gradient over 10 min with a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min. Solvents were supplemented with 0.1% formic acid. The applied scan range was m/z 100 to 2000 in positive and negative mode. MS-measurements were recorded on an Agilent Infinity II 1290 LCMS system equipped with a Single Quadrupol MS (6100 series, AJS ion source) and a C18-column (Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 1.9 μm, 2.1 × 100 mm) using a 5 to 95% H2O-acetonitrile (ACN) gradient over 10 min with a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min. Solvents were supplemented with 0.1% formic acid. The applied scan range was m/z 100 to 2000 in positive and negative mode. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy experiments (1H, 13C) were conducted using a Bruker AVHD-400 instrument at 303 K operating at 400 MHz and 101 MHz, respectively. Chemical shifts are reported in part per million (ppm) and referred to the solvent signal. The coupling constants are given in Hz and the multiplicities of the 1H-NMR are defined as s-singlet, d-doublet, dd-doublet of doublets, t-triplet, m-multiplet. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy experiments (1H, 13C) were conducted using a Bruker AVHD-400 instrument at 303 K operating at 400 MHz and 101 MHz, respectively. Chemical shifts are reported in part per million (ppm) and referred to the solvent signal. The coupling constants are given in Hz and the multiplicities of the 1H-NMR are defined as s-singlet, d-doublet, dd-doublet of doublets, t-triplet, m-multiplet. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy experiments (1H, 13C) were conducted using a Bruker AVHD-400 instrument at 303 K operating at 400 MHz and 101 MHz, respectively. Chemical shifts are reported in part per million (ppm) and referred to the solvent signal. The coupling constants are given in Hz and the multiplicities of the 1H-NMR are defined as s-singlet, d-doublet, dd-doublet of doublets, t-triplet, m-multiplet. 3-sec-butylmalate diethylester 3-sec-butylmalate diethylester 3-sec-butylmalate diethylester Under an atmosphere of nitrogen, lithium bis(trimethylsilyl)amide solution (1 M in THF, 23.13 ml, 23.1 mmol, 2.2 eq.) was cooled to −78 °C. Diethyl malate (2.0 g, 10.5 mmol, 1.0 eq.), dissolved in 10 ml THF, was added dropwise over 30 min and the reaction mixture was stirred at −78 °C for 1 h. The reaction was stirred and allowed to warm to 20 °C for an additional hour. Afterwards, the reaction mixture was cooled to −78 °C and 2-iodobutane (3.27 ml, 28.4 mmol, 2.7 eq.) was added over 10 min and stirred for 1 h at −78 °C. The reaction mixture was stirred overnight while allowing to reach ambient temperature. The reaction was quenched with 200 ml saturated ammonium chloride solution and extracted with ethyl acetate (3 × 100 ml). The combined organic phases were washed with brine (2 × 30 ml), dried over Na2SO4, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The crude product was purified with a BUCHI Pure C-815 Flash Chromatography System using a FlashPure EcoFlex Silica 12g cartridge using ethyl acetate and hexane (1:2) as solvents. 3-sec-butylmalate diethylester (693 mg, 2.8 mmol, 27%) was obtained as a pale-yellow oil. Under an atmosphere of nitrogen, lithium bis(trimethylsilyl)amide solution (1 M in THF, 23.13 ml, 23.1 mmol, 2.2 eq.) was cooled to −78 °C. Diethyl malate (2.0 g, 10.5 mmol, 1.0 eq.), dissolved in 10 ml THF, was added dropwise over 30 min and the reaction mixture was stirred at −78 °C for 1 h. The reaction was stirred and allowed to warm to 20 °C for an additional hour. Afterwards, the reaction mixture was cooled to −78 °C and 2-iodobutane (3.27 ml, 28.4 mmol, 2.7 eq.) was added over 10 min and stirred for 1 h at −78 °C. The reaction mixture was stirred overnight while allowing to reach ambient temperature. The reaction was quenched with 200 ml saturated ammonium chloride solution and extracted with ethyl acetate (3 × 100 ml). The combined organic phases were washed with brine (2 × 30 ml), dried over Na2SO4, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The crude product was purified with a BUCHI Pure C-815 Flash Chromatography System using a FlashPure EcoFlex Silica 12g cartridge using ethyl acetate and hexane (1:2) as solvents. 3-sec-butylmalate diethylester (693 mg, 2.8 mmol, 27%) was obtained as a pale-yellow oil. Under an atmosphere of nitrogen, lithium bis(trimethylsilyl)amide solution (1 M in THF, 23.13 ml, 23.1 mmol, 2.2 eq.) was cooled to −78 °C. Diethyl malate (2.0 g, 10.5 mmol, 1.0 eq.), dissolved in 10 ml THF, was added dropwise over 30 min and the reaction mixture was stirred at −78 °C for 1 h. The reaction was stirred and allowed to warm to 20 °C for an additional hour. Afterwards, the reaction mixture was cooled to −78 °C and 2-iodobutane (3.27 ml, 28.4 mmol, 2.7 eq.) was added over 10 min and stirred for 1 h at −78 °C. The reaction mixture was stirred overnight while allowing to reach ambient temperature. The reaction was quenched with 200 ml saturated ammonium chloride solution and extracted with ethyl acetate (3 × 100 ml). The combined organic phases were washed with brine (2 × 30 ml), dried over Na2SO4, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The crude product was purified with a BUCHI Pure C-815 Flash Chromatography System using a FlashPure EcoFlex Silica 12g cartridge using ethyl acetate and hexane (1:2) as solvents. 3-sec-butylmalate diethylester (693 mg, 2.8 mmol, 27%) was obtained as a pale-yellow oil. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ [ppm] = 4.36 (dd, J = 9.4, 3.6 Hz, 1H), 4.20 to 4.17 (m, 4H), 2.85 to 2.75 (m, 1H), 2.70 to 2.65 (m, 1H), 1.29 to 1.26 (m, 8H), 0.97 (d, J = 6.8 Hz, 3H), 0.92 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ [ppm] = 4.36 (dd, J = 9.4, 3.6 Hz, 1H), 4.20 to 4.17 (m, 4H), 2.85 to 2.75 (m, 1H), 2.70 to 2.65 (m, 1H), 1.29 to 1.26 (m, 8H), 0.97 (d, J = 6.8 Hz, 3H), 0.92 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ [ppm] = 4.36 (dd, J = 9.4, 3.6 Hz, 1H), 4.20 to 4.17 (m, 4H), 2.85 to 2.75 (m, 1H), 2.70 to 2.65 (m, 1H), 1.29 to 1.26 (m, 8H), 0.97 (d, J = 6.8 Hz, 3H), 0.92 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ [ppm] = 174.04, 172.90, 68.63, 53.67, 50.81, 47.81, 33.90, 26.85, 17.32, 14.65, 14.56, 11.27. 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ [ppm] = 174.04, 172.90, 68.63, 53.67, 50.81, 47.81, 33.90, 26.85, 17.32, 14.65, 14.56, 11.27. 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ [ppm] = 174.04, 172.90, 68.63, 53.67, 50.81, 47.81, 33.90, 26.85, 17.32, 14.65, 14.56, 11.27. MS: (+ESI): calc. for C12H22O5Na [M+Na]+: 269.15; found 269.1. MS: (+ESI): calc. for C12H22O5Na [M+Na]+: 269.15; found 269.1. MS: (+ESI): calc. for C12H22O5Na [M+Na]+: 269.15; found 269.1. 3-sec-butylmalate 3-sec-butylmalate 3-sec-butylmalate Under an atmosphere of nitrogen, 3-sec-butylmalate diethylester (200 mg, 0.8 mmol, 1.0 eq.) was dissolved in 2.7 ml methanol at 0 °C. Potassium hydroxide (200 mg, 3.6 mmol, 4.4 eq.) was added in one portion and stirred at 0 °C for 2 h. Volatiles were removed under reduced pressure and 3-sec-butylmalate (134 mg, 0.7 mmol, 87%) was obtained as a pale-yellow solid. Under an atmosphere of nitrogen, 3-sec-butylmalate diethylester (200 mg, 0.8 mmol, 1.0 eq.) was dissolved in 2.7 ml methanol at 0 °C. Potassium hydroxide (200 mg, 3.6 mmol, 4.4 eq.) was added in one portion and stirred at 0 °C for 2 h. Volatiles were removed under reduced pressure and 3-sec-butylmalate (134 mg, 0.7 mmol, 87%) was obtained as a pale-yellow solid. Under an atmosphere of nitrogen, 3-sec-butylmalate diethylester (200 mg, 0.8 mmol, 1.0 eq.) was dissolved in 2.7 ml methanol at 0 °C. Potassium hydroxide (200 mg, 3.6 mmol, 4.4 eq.) was added in one portion and stirred at 0 °C for 2 h. Volatiles were removed under reduced pressure and 3-sec-butylmalate (134 mg, 0.7 mmol, 87%) was obtained as a pale-yellow solid. 1H NMR (400 MHz, MeOD) δ [ppm] = 4.07 (d, J = 2.8 Hz, 1H), 2.69 to 2.54 (m, 1H), 2.43 to 2.38 (m, 1H), 1.29 to 1.16 (m, 2H), 1.00 (d, J = 6.8 Hz, 3H), 0.93 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 3H). 1H NMR (400 MHz, MeOD) δ [ppm] = 4.07 (d, J = 2.8 Hz, 1H), 2.69 to 2.54 (m, 1H), 2.43 to 2.38 (m, 1H), 1.29 to 1.16 (m, 2H), 1.00 (d, J = 6.8 Hz, 3H), 0.93 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 3H). 1H NMR (400 MHz, MeOD) δ [ppm] = 4.07 (d, J = 2.8 Hz, 1H), 2.69 to 2.54 (m, 1H), 2.43 to 2.38 (m, 1H), 1.29 to 1.16 (m, 2H), 1.00 (d, J = 6.8 Hz, 3H), 0.93 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 3H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, MeOD) δ [ppm] = 181.6, 180.4, 73.2, 58.1, 35.0, 27.4, 18.0, 11.4. 13C NMR (101 MHz, MeOD) δ [ppm] = 181.6, 180.4, 73.2, 58.1, 35.0, 27.4, 18.0, 11.4. 13C NMR (101 MHz, MeOD) δ [ppm] = 181.6, 180.4, 73.2, 58.1, 35.0, 27.4, 18.0, 11.4. MS (−ESI): calc. for C8H13O5 [M−H]−: 189.08; found 189.1. MS (−ESI): calc. for C8H13O5 [M−H]−: 189.08; found 189.1. MS (−ESI): calc. for C8H13O5 [M−H]−: 189.08; found 189.1. CysG and BelI enzyme assay conditions CysG and BelI enzyme assay conditions CysG and BelI enzyme assay conditions A standard CysG enzyme assay contained 1 mM 3-IPM, 1 mM SAM, and 5 μM His6-CysG. The BelI enzyme assay contained 1 mM 3-sec-butylmalate, 1 mM SAM and 5 μM BelI. Both assays were conducted in a total of 50 μl reaction volume in the presence of enzyme assay buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 20 mM KCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol). The assay was started by the addition of 3-IPM or 3-sec-butylmalate respectively and the reaction was run for 3 h at 30 °C. The reaction was stored at −20 °C until subjected to LC-MS analysis or purification. Negative controls did not contain 3-IPM, SAM, or the enzyme. A standard CysG enzyme assay contained 1 mM 3-IPM, 1 mM SAM, and 5 μM His6-CysG. The BelI enzyme assay contained 1 mM 3-sec-butylmalate, 1 mM SAM and 5 μM BelI. Both assays were conducted in a total of 50 μl reaction volume in the presence of enzyme assay buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 20 mM KCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol). The assay was started by the addition of 3-IPM or 3-sec-butylmalate respectively and the reaction was run for 3 h at 30 °C. The reaction was stored at −20 °C until subjected to LC-MS analysis or purification. Negative controls did not contain 3-IPM, SAM, or the enzyme. A standard CysG enzyme assay contained 1 mM 3-IPM, 1 mM SAM, and 5 μM His6-CysG. The BelI enzyme assay contained 1 mM 3-sec-butylmalate, 1 mM SAM and 5 μM BelI. Both assays were conducted in a total of 50 μl reaction volume in the presence of enzyme assay buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 20 mM KCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol). The assay was started by the addition of 3-IPM or 3-sec-butylmalate respectively and the reaction was run for 3 h at 30 °C. The reaction was stored at −20 °C until subjected to LC-MS analysis or purification. Negative controls did not contain 3-IPM, SAM, or the enzyme. Acetylation reaction Acetylation reaction Acetylation reaction 3-IPM-1-methyl-ester was incubated with 1 ml of pyridine (water-free) and 1 ml of acetic anhydride overnight under light exclusion. The acetylated product was precipitated with 20 ml of ice-cold water. Subsequently, the substance was extracted three times with 20 ml of chloroform. The organic phase was washed twice with distilled water and dried with Na2SO4. After the removal of the solvents using a laboratory freeze-dryer (−105 °C), the reaction product was analyzed by analytical HPLC and subjected to NMR measurements. 3-IPM-1-methyl-ester was incubated with 1 ml of pyridine (water-free) and 1 ml of acetic anhydride overnight under light exclusion. The acetylated product was precipitated with 20 ml of ice-cold water. Subsequently, the substance was extracted three times with 20 ml of chloroform. The organic phase was washed twice with distilled water and dried with Na2SO4. After the removal of the solvents using a laboratory freeze-dryer (−105 °C), the reaction product was analyzed by analytical HPLC and subjected to NMR measurements. 3-IPM-1-methyl-ester was incubated with 1 ml of pyridine (water-free) and 1 ml of acetic anhydride overnight under light exclusion. The acetylated product was precipitated with 20 ml of ice-cold water. Subsequently, the substance was extracted three times with 20 ml of chloroform. The organic phase was washed twice with distilled water and dried with Na2SO4. After the removal of the solvents using a laboratory freeze-dryer (−105 °C), the reaction product was analyzed by analytical HPLC and subjected to NMR measurements. Data availability Data availability All data presented are contained within the article. All data presented are contained within the article. Supporting information Supporting information This article contains supporting information. This article contains supporting information. Conflict of interest Conflict of interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest with the contents of the article. The authors declare no conflicts of interest with the contents of the article. References Supporting information Supporting information Supporting Figures and Tables Supporting Figures and Tables Supporting Figures and Tables Supporting Figures and Tables Author contribution Author contribution P. B., P. F., F. W., D. M., I. H., D. U., A. E., W. K., N. D. S., and A. K. investigation; P. B. writing – original draft; F. W. and N. D. S. formal analysis; F. W., D. M., W. K. and N. D. S. methodology; A. E. validation; H. G. and L. K. conceptualization; H. G. and M. G. data curation; H. G., M. G. and L. K. supervision; L. K. writing – reviewing and editing. P. B., P. F., F. W., D. M., I. H., D. U., A. E., W. K., N. D. S., and A. K. investigation; P. B. writing – original draft; F. W. and N. D. S. formal analysis; F. W., D. M., W. K. and N. D. S. methodology; A. E. validation; H. G. and L. K. conceptualization; H. G. and M. G. data curation; H. G., M. G. and L. K. supervision; L. K. writing – reviewing and editing. Funding and additional information Funding and additional information This work was funded by the 10.13039/501100001659Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Foundation, DFG) TRR 261, project-ID No. 398967434-TRR 261, GRK1708 (L. K and A. E.), 10.13039/100004807DFG-SFB 1309–325871075 (W. K. and M. G.) as well as KA 3071/4-1 (L. K. and F. W.) and KA 3071/6-1 (L. K. and P. B.). N. D. S. and L. K. were also supported by the Institutional Strategy of the University of Tübingen (DFG, ZUK 63). Publication was funded by the Open Access Publishing Fund of Leipzig University supported by the German Research Foundation within the program Open Access Publication Funding. This work was funded by the 10.13039/501100001659Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Foundation, DFG) TRR 261, project-ID No. 398967434-TRR 261, GRK1708 (L. K and A. E.), 10.13039/100004807DFG-SFB 1309–325871075 (W. K. and M. G.) as well as KA 3071/4-1 (L. K. and F. W.) and KA 3071/6-1 (L. K. and P. B.). N. D. S. and L. K. were also supported by the Institutional Strategy of the University of Tübingen (DFG, ZUK 63). Publication was funded by the Open Access Publishing Fund of Leipzig University supported by the German Research Foundation within the program Open Access Publication Funding.