3. Discussion The FUM cluster of F. verticillioides contains two genes, FUM17 (FVEG_00327) and FUM18 (FVEG_00328), which have sequence similarity to ceramide synthases. It has previously been reported [41] that both FUM17 and FUM18 expression were upregulated by FB1 addition to the medium. We used a fum1 background to avoid contribution by differences in endogenous FB1 production to the overall effect. Both genes, which are located next to each other (with overlapping 3′ ends of the mRNAs), had been inactivated simultaneously by the insertion of a hygromycin resistance gene, which did not lead to a significant reduction of fumonisin production [12]. More recently, it was reported that “self-protection against the sphingolipid biosynthesis inhibitor fumonisin B1 is conferred by a FUM cluster-encoded ceramide synthase” [31]. Using an assay supposedly reflecting fungal biomass, which is based on the activation of resazurin (a dye that is converted into the fluorescent derivative resorufin by respiratory activity), more relative inhibition (about 120% compared to wild-type) in liquid culture was observed upon addition of FB1 [31]. No direct evidence for reduced growth of the knock-out strain on a solid medium was shown. Our results confirm that the FUM18 gene is sufficient to confer fumonisin resistance when expressed in fumonisin-sensitive yeast. The double mutant lag1 lac1 is lethal in most yeast strains. The FUM17 plasmid did not complement the conditional yeast mutant [31] when doxycycline was added in order to switch off the expression of the integrated tetracycline-regulated promoter PTET-LAG1 gene in the Δlac1 background. In agreement with this finding, we did not observe increased resistance compared to the empty vector in our sensitive yeast strain. It has been reported that FUM17 is obviously non-functional in two other strains of the F. fujikuroi species complex [41], and more subtle mutations may also lead to the inactivity of the F. verticillioides FUM17 gene product. While FUM18 is sufficient to confer resistance in yeast, it is surprisingly not necessary for the high-level resistance to FB1 in F. verticillioides. The knockout mutants (fum17-18 double mutant, similar to that described but with a different selection marker, fum17-18Δ::HSVtk-nptII) in the fum1::hygB background are hardly inhibited in growth on solid medium by added FB1 (Figure 3). The observed effect of inactivating the cluster ceramide synthases on FB1-mediated growth inhibition is minor, but unexpectedly, differences in the amount and timing of pigment formation were observed between independent fum1 fum17-18 and fum1 mutants. Since both strains are fum1 mutants, this should not be due to an alteration of the metabolic flux from fumonisin into a different metabolite that is responsible for this phenotype. Further research would be necessary to elucidate which changes occur at the level of the transcriptome or metabolome. The result that FUM18 is not necessary for fumonisin resistance can be explained by our finding that other ceramide synthases of F. verticillioides also confer high-level resistance in yeast. A surprising result is the high level of resistance conferred by CER3 (FVEG_15375), as it was reported that this gene is not able to complement the yeast ceramide synthase’s loss of function [41]. Janevska et al. [41] reported that in the resazurin assay, overexpression of CER1 (FVEG_06971) and CER2 (FVEG_06971) showed a slightly reduced growth inhibition compared to the empty vector. In our strain, the same overexpression plasmids conferred high-level resistance (no evident inhibition at 175 µM FB1) and the transformants were growing at least as well as the FUM18-overexpressing strain (see Figure 4). The finding that FUM18 is not necessary for self-resistance is in agreement with results with an alt7 knockout strain in A. alternata producing AAL toxin. ALT7 is a ceramide synthase gene located in the cluster for AAL toxin biosynthesis. The knockout of ALT7 had no deleterious effect on the AAL toxin-producing pathogen, so the authors concluded that the gene does not act as a resistance/self-tolerance factor [42]. For the fungi that we tested, the hypothesis holds true that fumonisin producers are more resistant to FB1 than related non-producers. Several black Aspergilli can produce fumonisins B2, B4, and B6, e.g., on grapes [43] or maize [44], although the levels are typically lower than in Fusarium. The non-producing model fungus A. nidulans turned out to be extremely sensitive to added FB1; growth was already fully inhibited by 10 µM FB1. The FUM cluster of A. niger does not contain a ceramide synthase [45], but it nevertheless showed higher resistance than A. nidulans and it potentially also has “housekeeping” ceramide synthase genes responsible for the higher FB1 resistance. In agreement with the reported much higher resistance in F. graminearum [29] and in contrast to Dawidziuk et al. [30], we found that the F. graminearum strain PH-1, lacking a FUM18 ortholog, displayed quite high FB1 resistance (Figure 1). If the fungus–fungus competition hypothesis is meaningful, as obviously production of very high levels of fumonisins is needed in this scenario. Numerous cases exist (for review see [46]) where duplicated housekeeping genes containing sequence alterations encode insensitive target enzymes. These are often associated with toxin or antibiotic biosynthetic gene clusters, which allow for the elucidation of the mode of action of some compounds [47,48]. The presence of a (duplicated) putative self-resistance gene in a secondary metabolite biosynthetic cluster has been successfully used to identify new compounds with a desired mode of action, for instance, in the case of aspterric acid of A. terreus targeting branched-chain amino-acid biosynthesis [49]. Yet, the conclusion that such enzymes are also necessary for self-resistance may not be correct. Our results show that in the case of F. verticillioides, the fumonisin-cluster-encoded ceramide synthase FUM18 is not necessary for self-resistance due to redundancy in self-resistance genes, as three other ceramide synthases, CER1–3, are additionally sufficient to confer fumonisin resistance.