The arbitrary and overuses of antibiotics have resulted in the emergence of multidrug resistance bacteria which encounters human to a serious public health problem. Thus, there is an ever-increasing demand for discovery of novel effective antibiotics with new modes of function against resistant pathogens. Endophytic actinobacteria (EA) have currently been considered as one of the most prospective group of microorganisms for discovery of therapeutic agents. This study aimed to isolate EA from Thymes kotschyanus, Allium hooshidaryae, and Cerasus microcarpa plants and to evaluate their antibacterial properties. The healthy samples were collected, dissected and surface-sterilized before cultured on four different selection media at 28ʡC. Nine EA were isolated and identified based on morphological and molecular properties, and scanning electron micrograph analyses. Based on phylogenetic analysis, they were taxonomically grouped into four families Streptomycetaceae, Nocardiaceae, Micromonosporaceae, and Pseudonocardiaceae. Their branched aerial mycelia produced chains of cylindrical or cube or oval shaped spores with smooth or rough surfaces. Four strains; IKBG03, IKBG05, IKBG13, and IKBG17 had less than 98.65% sequence similarity to their closely related strains, which constitute them as novel species/strains. Besides, three strains; IKBG05, IKBG13, and IKBG18 were reported as endophytes for the first time. Preliminary antibacterial activity conducted on the all isolates revealed potent antibacterial effects against Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. All isolates strongly inhibited the growth of at least one of the tested pathogens. Our results reveals that the test plants are novel sources for isolating a diverse group of rare and common actinobacteria that could produce a wide range of novel biologically active natural products with antibacterial activity which have a great potential in pharmaceutical and biotechnological applications.