Conspectus  The genomic era has dramatically changed how we discover and investigate
microbial biochemistry. In particular, the exponential expansion in
the number of sequenced microbial genomes provides investigators with
a vast wealth of sequence data to exploit for the discovery of biochemical
functions and mechanisms, as well as novel enzymes and metabolites.
In contrast to early biochemical work, which was largely characterized
by “forward” approaches that proceed from biomass to
enzyme to gene, the availability of genome sequences enables the discovery
of new microbial metabolic activities, enzymes, and metabolites by
“reverse” approaches that originate with genetic information
or by approaches that incorporate features of both forward and reverse
methodologies. In the genomic era, the canonical organization of microbial
genomes into gene clusters presents a singular opportunity for the
utilization of genomic data. Specifically, genomic context (information
gleaned from the genes surrounding a gene of interest in the chromosome)
is a powerful tool for chemical discovery in microbial systems because
of the functional and/or physiological relationship that usually exists
between genes found within a gene cluster. This means that the investigator
can use this inferred link to generate hypotheses about the functions
of individual genes in the cluster or even the function of the entire
cluster itself. Here, we discuss how analysis of genomic context in
combination with a mechanistic understanding of enzymes can facilitate
numerous facets of microbial biochemical research including the identification
of biosynthetic gene clusters, the discovery of important and novel
enzymes, the elucidation of natural product structures, and the identification
of new metabolic pathways. We highlight work from our laboratory using
genomic context to discover and study biosynthetic pathways that produce
natural products, including the cylindrocyclophanes, nitrogen–nitrogen
bond-containing metabolites, and the gut microbial genotoxin colibactin.
Although use of genomic context is most commonly associated with studies
of natural product biosynthesis, we also show that it can be applied
to the study of primary metabolism. We illustrate this with examples
from our work studying the members of the glycyl radical enzyme superfamily
involved in choline and 4-hydroxyproline degradation in the human
gut. Looking forward, we envision increased opportunities to use such
information, with the combination of biochemical knowledge and computational
tools poised to fuel a new revolution in our ability to connect genes
and their biochemical functions. In particular, we note a need for
methods that computationally formalize the functional association
between genes when such associations are not obvious from manual gene
annotations. Such tools will drastically augment the feasibility and
scope of gene cluster analysis and accelerate the discovery of new
microbial enzymes, metabolites, and metabolic processes.