Background Aerobic metabolism generates reactive oxygen species that may cause critical harm to the cell. The aim of this study is the characterization of the stress responses in the model aromatic-degrading bacterium Paraburkholderia xenovorans LB400 to the oxidizing agents paraquat and H2O2. Methods Antioxidant genes were identified by bioinformatic methods in the genome of P. xenovorans LB400, and the phylogeny of its OxyR and SoxR transcriptional regulators were studied. Functionality of the transcriptional regulators from strain LB400 was assessed by complementation with LB400 SoxR of null mutant P. aeruginosa ΔsoxR, and the construction of P. xenovorans pIZoxyR that overexpresses OxyR. The effects of oxidizing agents on P. xenovorans were studied measuring bacterial susceptibility, survival and ROS formation after exposure to paraquat and H2O2. The effects of these oxidants on gene expression (qRT-PCR) and the proteome (LC–MS/MS) were quantified. Results P. xenovorans LB400 possesses a wide repertoire of genes for the antioxidant defense including the oxyR, ahpC, ahpF, kat, trxB, dpsA and gorA genes, whose orthologous genes are regulated by the transcriptional regulator OxyR in E. coli. The LB400 genome also harbors the soxR, fumC, acnA, sodB, fpr and fldX genes, whose orthologous genes are regulated by the transcriptional regulator SoxR in E. coli. The functionality of the LB400 soxR gene was confirmed by complementation of null mutant P. aeruginosa ΔsoxR. Growth, susceptibility, and ROS formation assays revealed that LB400 cells were more susceptible to paraquat than H2O2. Transcriptional analyses indicated the upregulation of the oxyR, ahpC1, katE and ohrB genes in LB400 cells after exposure to H2O2, whereas the oxyR, fumC, ahpC1, sodB1 and ohrB genes were induced in presence of paraquat. Proteome analysis revealed that paraquat induced the oxidative stress response proteins AhpCF and DpsA, the universal stress protein UspA and the RNA chaperone CspA. Both oxidizing agents induced the Ohr protein, which is involved in organic peroxide resistance. Notably, the overexpression of the LB400 oxyR gene in P. xenovorans significantly decreased the ROS formation and the susceptibility to paraquat, suggesting a broad OxyR-regulated antioxidant response. Conclusions This study showed that P. xenovorans LB400 possess a broad range oxidative stress response, which explain the high resistance of this strain to the oxidizing compounds paraquat and H2O2. Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40659-022-00373-7.