Simple Summary Bacillus is a bacterial genus that is widely used as a promising alternative to chemical pesticides due to its protective activity toward economically important plant pathogens. Fusarium wilt of tomato is a serious fungal disease limiting tomato production worldwide. Recently, the newly isolated B. inaquosorum strain KR2-7 considerably suppressed Fusarium wilt of tomato plants. The present study was performed to perceive potential direct and indirect biocontrol mechanisms implemented by KR2-7 against this disease through genome and chemical analysis. The potential direct biocontrol mechanisms of KR2-7 were determined through the identification of genes involved in the synthesis of antibiotically active compounds suppressing tomato Fusarium wilt. Furthermore, the indirect mechanisms of this bacterium were perceived through recognizing genes that contributed to the resource acquisition or modulation of plant hormone levels. This is the first study that aimed at the modes of actions of B. inaquosorum against Fusarium wilt of tomatoes and the results strongly indicate that strain KR2-7 could be a good candidate for microbial biopesticide formulations to be used for biological control of plant diseases and plant growth promotion. Abstract Tomato Fusarium wilt, caused by Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici (Fol), is a destructive disease that threatens the agricultural production of tomatoes. In the present study, the biocontrol potential of strain KR2-7 against Fol was investigated through integrated genome mining and chemical analysis. Strain KR2-7 was identified as B. inaquosorum based on phylogenetic analysis. Through the genome mining of strain KR2-7, we identified nine antifungal and antibacterial compound biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) including fengycin, surfactin and Bacillomycin F, bacillaene, macrolactin, sporulation killing factor (skf), subtilosin A, bacilysin, and bacillibactin. The corresponding compounds were confirmed through MALDI-TOF-MS chemical analysis. The gene/gene clusters involved in plant colonization, plant growth promotion, and induced systemic resistance were also identified in the KR2-7 genome, and their related secondary metabolites were detected. In light of these results, the biocontrol potential of strain KR2-7 against tomato Fusarium wilt was identified. This study highlights the potential to use strain KR2-7 as a plant-growth promotion agent.