Simple Summary Insects are the most numerous and diverse animals on our planet. They have mastered different habitats and are able to resist many external threats. Many of them have long concluded mutually beneficial alliances with microorganisms that are capable of producing biologically active substances. We found that Messor structor ants have a very common actinobacteria that secretes albomycin, an antibiotic capable of suppressing the growth of enthomopathogenic bacteria in the smallest concentrations. Perhaps this is one of the secrets of ants’ resistance to external factors and their successful evolutionary development. Abstract There are several well-studied examples of protective symbiosis between insect host and symbiotic actinobacteria, producing antimicrobial metabolites to inhibit host pathogens. These mutualistic relationships are best described for some wasps and leaf-cutting ants, while a huge variety of insect species still remain poorly explored. For the first time, we isolated actinobacteria from the harvester ant Messor structor and evaluated the isolates’ potential as antimicrobial producers. All isolates could be divided into two morphotypes of single and mycelial cells. We found that the most common mycelial morphotype was observed among soldiers and least common among larvae in the studied laboratory colony. The representative of this morphotype was identified as Streptomyces globisporus subsp. globisporus 4-3 by a polyphasic approach. It was established using a E. coli JW5503 pDualRep2 system that crude broths of mycelial isolates inhibited protein synthesis in reporter strains, but it did not disrupt the in vitro synthesis of proteins in cell-free extracts. An active compound was extracted, purified and identified as albomycin δ2. The pronounced ability of albomycin to inhibit the growth of entomopathogens suggests that Streptomyces globisporus subsp. globisporus may be involved in defensive symbiosis with the Messor structor ant against infections.