ABSTRACT Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a universal phenomenon the origins of which lay in natural ecological interactions such as competition within niches, within and between micro- to higher-order organisms. To study these phenomena, it is crucial to examine the origins of AMR in pristine environments, i.e., limited anthropogenic influences. In this context, epilithic biofilms residing in glacier-fed streams (GFSs) are an excellent model system to study diverse, intra- and inter-domain, ecological crosstalk. We assessed the resistomes of epilithic biofilms from GFSs across the Southern Alps (New Zealand) and the Caucasus (Russia) and observed that both bacteria and eukaryotes encoded twenty-nine distinct AMR categories. Of these, beta-lactam, aminoglycoside, and multidrug resistance were both abundant and taxonomically distributed in most of the bacterial and eukaryotic phyla. AMR-encoding phyla included Bacteroidota and Proteobacteria among the bacteria, alongside Ochrophyta (algae) among the eukaryotes. Additionally, biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) involved in the production of antibacterial compounds were identified across all phyla in the epilithic biofilms. Furthermore, we found that several bacterial genera (Flavobacterium, Polaromonas, Superphylum Patescibacteria) encode both atimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) and BGCs within close proximity of each other, demonstrating their capacity to simultaneously influence and compete within the microbial community. Our findings help unravel how naturally occurring BGCs and AMR contribute to the epilithic biofilms mode of life in GFSs. Additionally, we report that eukaryotes may serve as AMR reservoirs owing to their potential for encoding ARGs. Importantly, these observations may be generalizable and potentially extended to other environments that may be more or less impacted by human activity. IMPORTANCE Antimicrobial resistance is an omnipresent phenomenon in the anthropogenically influenced ecosystems. However, its role in shaping microbial community dynamics in pristine environments is relatively unknown. Using metagenomics, we report the presence of antimicrobial resistance genes and their associated pathways in epilithic biofilms within glacier-fed streams. Importantly, we observe biosynthetic gene clusters associated with antimicrobial resistance in both pro- and eukaryotes in these biofilms. Understanding the role of resistance in the context of this pristine environment and complex biodiversity may shed light on previously uncharacterized mechanisms of cross-domain interactions.