These authors made equal contributions to this work. Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), a housekeeping enzyme in primary metabolism, has been extensively studied as a model of acid-base catalysis and a clinic drug target. Herein, we investigated the enzymology of a DHFR-like protein SacH in safracin (SAC) biosynthesis, which reductively inactivates hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing biosynthetic intermediates and antibiotics for self-resistance. Furthermore, based on the crystal structure of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A ternary complexes and mutagenesis, we proposed a catalytic mechanism that is distinct from the previously characterized short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases-mediated inactivation of hemiaminal pharmacophore. These findings expand the functions of DHFR family proteins, reveal that the common reaction can be catalyzed by distinct family of enzymes, and imply the possibility for the discovery of novel antibiotics with hemiaminal pharmacophore. Graphical abstract A dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR)-like protein SacH in safracin (SAC) biosynthesis was found to reductively inactivates hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing antibiotics for self-resistance, expanding the functions of DHFR family proteins.Image 1 Image 1 Key words Introduction Introduction Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) catalyzes the reduction of 7,8-dihydrofolate (DHF) to 5,6,7,8,-tetrahydrofolate (THF) with NADPH as a cofactor, which plays an essential role in cellular biochemistry. This housekeeping enzyme has been serving as a model system for investigating not only the role of protein dynamics but also a general acid-base catalysis in enzyme reaction1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Significantly, DHFR has been a well-studied drug target for over 60 years, exhibited by famous antifolate inhibitors as clinical therapeutics, such as methotrexate, trimethoprim, and pyrimethamine for anticancer, anti-rheumatoid arthritis, anti-bacterial, anti-fungal and antiparasitic treatments6, 7, 8, 9. However, other functions of DHFR family proteins were seldom reported, especially those involved in secondary metabolism. Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) catalyzes the reduction of 7,8-dihydrofolate (DHF) to 5,6,7,8,-tetrahydrofolate (THF) with NADPH as a cofactor, which plays an essential role in cellular biochemistry. This housekeeping enzyme has been serving as a model system for investigating not only the role of protein dynamics but also a general acid-base catalysis in enzyme reaction1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Significantly, DHFR has been a well-studied drug target for over 60 years, exhibited by famous antifolate inhibitors as clinical therapeutics, such as methotrexate, trimethoprim, and pyrimethamine for anticancer, anti-rheumatoid arthritis, anti-bacterial, anti-fungal and antiparasitic treatments6, 7, 8, 9. However, other functions of DHFR family proteins were seldom reported, especially those involved in secondary metabolism. Saframycin (SFM) family antibiotics, including safracins (SACs, 1–3) from Pseudomonas fluorescens, SFMs (6–8) from Streptomyces lavendulae, and ecteinascidin-743 (ET-743, 4) from Ecteinascidia turbinate (Fig. 1A), are the major subgroup of tetrahydroisoquinoline (THIQ) alkaloids that receive significant attractions in chemistry, biology, and drug development10,11. ET-743 has been approved as an orphan drug for soft tissue sarcoma, and CN-SAC-B (3) has been serving as available material for semi-synthesis of ET-74312. Some members of this family, such as SAC-B (1), ET-743 (4) and SFM-S (7), containing hemiaminal moiety, could spontaneously form the electrophilic iminium species in acidic solution to alkylate the GC-rich region of DNA at the N2 of a guanine, thereby exhibiting antitumor and antibacterial activities10. However, compounds without the hemiaminal moiety including SAC-A (2), ET-745 (5) and SFM-B (8) show weak or no activity. Recently, during the biosynthetic studies of naphthyridinomycin (NDM, 9), we found a family of short-chain dehydrogenase/red-uctase (SDR), such as NapW and SfmO1, for reducing the hemiaminal moiety of both NDM and SFM-S, thereby inactivating the pharmacophore to protect the hosts from DNA-alkylation13. Given the fact of similar structures as well as biosynthetic pathways between SACs and SFMs11, we supposed that a parallel enzyme-mediated self-resistance should be involved in SAC biosynthesis. However, no homolog of NapW/SfmO1 is encoded by the biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) of SACs14. Currently, the functions of most genes in sac BGC have been defined including sacH14,15, which was previously suggested to encode a resistant protein based on the cell lysis conversion of SAC-B into SAC-A. Therefore, we deeply characterized the enzymology of the DHFR-like protein SacH (Supporting Information Fig. S1), which present another type of enzymatic inactivation of hemiaminal pharmacophore with different catalytic mechanism and broad substrate promiscuity.Figure 1Members of tetrahydroisoquinoline (THIQ) alkaloids and inactivation of their hemiaminal pharmacophores for self-resistance. (A) Chemical structures of THIQ alkaloids. (B) The inactivation of hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing intermediate involved in saframycin biosynthesis.Figure 1 Saframycin (SFM) family antibiotics, including safracins (SACs, 1–3) from Pseudomonas fluorescens, SFMs (6–8) from Streptomyces lavendulae, and ecteinascidin-743 (ET-743, 4) from Ecteinascidia turbinate (Fig. 1A), are the major subgroup of tetrahydroisoquinoline (THIQ) alkaloids that receive significant attractions in chemistry, biology, and drug development10,11. ET-743 has been approved as an orphan drug for soft tissue sarcoma, and CN-SAC-B (3) has been serving as available material for semi-synthesis of ET-74312. Some members of this family, such as SAC-B (1), ET-743 (4) and SFM-S (7), containing hemiaminal moiety, could spontaneously form the electrophilic iminium species in acidic solution to alkylate the GC-rich region of DNA at the N2 of a guanine, thereby exhibiting antitumor and antibacterial activities10. However, compounds without the hemiaminal moiety including SAC-A (2), ET-745 (5) and SFM-B (8) show weak or no activity. Recently, during the biosynthetic studies of naphthyridinomycin (NDM, 9), we found a family of short-chain dehydrogenase/red-uctase (SDR), such as NapW and SfmO1, for reducing the hemiaminal moiety of both NDM and SFM-S, thereby inactivating the pharmacophore to protect the hosts from DNA-alkylation13. Given the fact of similar structures as well as biosynthetic pathways between SACs and SFMs11, we supposed that a parallel enzyme-mediated self-resistance should be involved in SAC biosynthesis. However, no homolog of NapW/SfmO1 is encoded by the biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) of SACs14. Currently, the functions of most genes in sac BGC have been defined including sacH14,15, which was previously suggested to encode a resistant protein based on the cell lysis conversion of SAC-B into SAC-A. Therefore, we deeply characterized the enzymology of the DHFR-like protein SacH (Supporting Information Fig. S1), which present another type of enzymatic inactivation of hemiaminal pharmacophore with different catalytic mechanism and broad substrate promiscuity.Figure 1Members of tetrahydroisoquinoline (THIQ) alkaloids and inactivation of their hemiaminal pharmacophores for self-resistance. (A) Chemical structures of THIQ alkaloids. (B) The inactivation of hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing intermediate involved in saframycin biosynthesis.Figure 1 Figure 1Members of tetrahydroisoquinoline (THIQ) alkaloids and inactivation of their hemiaminal pharmacophores for self-resistance. (A) Chemical structures of THIQ alkaloids. (B) The inactivation of hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing intermediate involved in saframycin biosynthesis.Figure 1 Figure 1Members of tetrahydroisoquinoline (THIQ) alkaloids and inactivation of their hemiaminal pharmacophores for self-resistance. (A) Chemical structures of THIQ alkaloids. (B) The inactivation of hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing intermediate involved in saframycin biosynthesis.Figure 1 Members of tetrahydroisoquinoline (THIQ) alkaloids and inactivation of their hemiaminal pharmacophores for self-resistance. (A) Chemical structures of THIQ alkaloids. (B) The inactivation of hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing intermediate involved in saframycin biosynthesis. Members of tetrahydroisoquinoline (THIQ) alkaloids and inactivation of their hemiaminal pharmacophores for self-resistance. (A) Chemical structures of THIQ alkaloids. (B) The inactivation of hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing intermediate involved in saframycin biosynthesis. Results and discussion Results and discussion The reduction of SAC-B hemiaminal pharmacophore catalyzed by SacH The reduction of SAC-B hemiaminal pharmacophore catalyzed by SacH The reduction of SAC-B hemiaminal pharmacophore catalyzed by SacH To begin with, SacH was gene-expressed and purified (Supporting Information Fig. S2) from Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) to carry out the in vitro enzymatic assays. During the well-studied hemiaminal pharmacophore inactivation in SFM pathway, the BGC encoding SDR SfmO1 was elucidated not only to reduce THIQ antibiotics, but also to recognize the off-line intermediate 11 for self-resistance (Fig. 1B)13. Characterization of SAC tailoring steps established that a long-chain fatty acyl group is necessary for the biosynthesis15; therefore, a similar reduction step should be required to quench the reactive intermediate. The intermediate 11 was bio-generated in-situ using SfmC-mediated enzymatic synthesis with 13 and 14 as substrates (Fig. 2A)13,16. Then, the SacH-catalyzed reaction was performed with NADPH as the cofactor. Just as expected, the enzymatic product 12 was generated based on HPLC (Fig. 2B) and MS (Fig. 2C) analysis. When the assay was conducted using SAC-B (Supporting Information Table S4, Figs. S20‒S25) as the substrate (Fig. 2D), the reduction product SAC-A (Supporting Information Table S5, Figs. S26‒S31) was observed (Fig. 2E). To further characterize the function of SacH, we performed the sacH-deletion experiment in P. fluorescens by using gene inactivation vector pK18mobsacB. However, similar to the gene-deletion experiments of berkC17, a self-resistance gene in Penicillium egyptiacum, after enormous attempts and screenings with different sucrose concentrations, it was still failed to get the sacH-deletion strain. Then E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells were used as the test strain to examine the relationship between sacH-expression and the resistance against SAC-B. The results showed that the survival ratio of sacH-expression strain did not decrease with the increase of SAC-B concentration, compared with the control strain containing vector pET28a (Fig. 2F). These collective results unambiguously supported that SacH, the DHFR-like protein, endows host cells resistance to SAC-B for self-protection via reductive inactivation of not only the end-product but also the hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing biosynthetic intermediate.Figure 2Biochemical characterizations of SacH-mediated self-resistance. (A) SfmC-SacH cascade enzymatic reactions. (B) LC‒MS analysis of the enzymatic reaction products: I, EIC of m/z = 705.5 for 11 generated by SfmC; II, EIC of m/z = 707.5 for 12 generated by SacH. (C) ESI-MS analysis of 11 and 12. (D) Enzymatic reaction using SAC-B as the substrate. (E) HPLC analysis of the reactions in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, enzymatic reaction with SacH; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, SAC-A standard. (F) Comparison of the antibacterial activity of SAC-B against E. coli BL21 (DE3) containing pET28a (vector, red line) and pTG3044 (bearing sacH, black line).Figure 2 To begin with, SacH was gene-expressed and purified (Supporting Information Fig. S2) from Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) to carry out the in vitro enzymatic assays. During the well-studied hemiaminal pharmacophore inactivation in SFM pathway, the BGC encoding SDR SfmO1 was elucidated not only to reduce THIQ antibiotics, but also to recognize the off-line intermediate 11 for self-resistance (Fig. 1B)13. Characterization of SAC tailoring steps established that a long-chain fatty acyl group is necessary for the biosynthesis15; therefore, a similar reduction step should be required to quench the reactive intermediate. The intermediate 11 was bio-generated in-situ using SfmC-mediated enzymatic synthesis with 13 and 14 as substrates (Fig. 2A)13,16. Then, the SacH-catalyzed reaction was performed with NADPH as the cofactor. Just as expected, the enzymatic product 12 was generated based on HPLC (Fig. 2B) and MS (Fig. 2C) analysis. When the assay was conducted using SAC-B (Supporting Information Table S4, Figs. S20‒S25) as the substrate (Fig. 2D), the reduction product SAC-A (Supporting Information Table S5, Figs. S26‒S31) was observed (Fig. 2E). To further characterize the function of SacH, we performed the sacH-deletion experiment in P. fluorescens by using gene inactivation vector pK18mobsacB. However, similar to the gene-deletion experiments of berkC17, a self-resistance gene in Penicillium egyptiacum, after enormous attempts and screenings with different sucrose concentrations, it was still failed to get the sacH-deletion strain. Then E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells were used as the test strain to examine the relationship between sacH-expression and the resistance against SAC-B. The results showed that the survival ratio of sacH-expression strain did not decrease with the increase of SAC-B concentration, compared with the control strain containing vector pET28a (Fig. 2F). These collective results unambiguously supported that SacH, the DHFR-like protein, endows host cells resistance to SAC-B for self-protection via reductive inactivation of not only the end-product but also the hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing biosynthetic intermediate.Figure 2Biochemical characterizations of SacH-mediated self-resistance. (A) SfmC-SacH cascade enzymatic reactions. (B) LC‒MS analysis of the enzymatic reaction products: I, EIC of m/z = 705.5 for 11 generated by SfmC; II, EIC of m/z = 707.5 for 12 generated by SacH. (C) ESI-MS analysis of 11 and 12. (D) Enzymatic reaction using SAC-B as the substrate. (E) HPLC analysis of the reactions in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, enzymatic reaction with SacH; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, SAC-A standard. (F) Comparison of the antibacterial activity of SAC-B against E. coli BL21 (DE3) containing pET28a (vector, red line) and pTG3044 (bearing sacH, black line).Figure 2 To begin with, SacH was gene-expressed and purified (Supporting Information Fig. S2) from Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) to carry out the in vitro enzymatic assays. During the well-studied hemiaminal pharmacophore inactivation in SFM pathway, the BGC encoding SDR SfmO1 was elucidated not only to reduce THIQ antibiotics, but also to recognize the off-line intermediate 11 for self-resistance (Fig. 1B)13. Characterization of SAC tailoring steps established that a long-chain fatty acyl group is necessary for the biosynthesis15; therefore, a similar reduction step should be required to quench the reactive intermediate. The intermediate 11 was bio-generated in-situ using SfmC-mediated enzymatic synthesis with 13 and 14 as substrates (Fig. 2A)13,16. Then, the SacH-catalyzed reaction was performed with NADPH as the cofactor. Just as expected, the enzymatic product 12 was generated based on HPLC (Fig. 2B) and MS (Fig. 2C) analysis. When the assay was conducted using SAC-B (Supporting Information Table S4, Figs. S20‒S25) as the substrate (Fig. 2D), the reduction product SAC-A (Supporting Information Table S5, Figs. S26‒S31) was observed (Fig. 2E). To further characterize the function of SacH, we performed the sacH-deletion experiment in P. fluorescens by using gene inactivation vector pK18mobsacB. However, similar to the gene-deletion experiments of berkC17, a self-resistance gene in Penicillium egyptiacum, after enormous attempts and screenings with different sucrose concentrations, it was still failed to get the sacH-deletion strain. Then E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells were used as the test strain to examine the relationship between sacH-expression and the resistance against SAC-B. The results showed that the survival ratio of sacH-expression strain did not decrease with the increase of SAC-B concentration, compared with the control strain containing vector pET28a (Fig. 2F). These collective results unambiguously supported that SacH, the DHFR-like protein, endows host cells resistance to SAC-B for self-protection via reductive inactivation of not only the end-product but also the hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing biosynthetic intermediate.Figure 2Biochemical characterizations of SacH-mediated self-resistance. (A) SfmC-SacH cascade enzymatic reactions. (B) LC‒MS analysis of the enzymatic reaction products: I, EIC of m/z = 705.5 for 11 generated by SfmC; II, EIC of m/z = 707.5 for 12 generated by SacH. (C) ESI-MS analysis of 11 and 12. (D) Enzymatic reaction using SAC-B as the substrate. (E) HPLC analysis of the reactions in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, enzymatic reaction with SacH; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, SAC-A standard. (F) Comparison of the antibacterial activity of SAC-B against E. coli BL21 (DE3) containing pET28a (vector, red line) and pTG3044 (bearing sacH, black line).Figure 2 Figure 2Biochemical characterizations of SacH-mediated self-resistance. (A) SfmC-SacH cascade enzymatic reactions. (B) LC‒MS analysis of the enzymatic reaction products: I, EIC of m/z = 705.5 for 11 generated by SfmC; II, EIC of m/z = 707.5 for 12 generated by SacH. (C) ESI-MS analysis of 11 and 12. (D) Enzymatic reaction using SAC-B as the substrate. (E) HPLC analysis of the reactions in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, enzymatic reaction with SacH; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, SAC-A standard. (F) Comparison of the antibacterial activity of SAC-B against E. coli BL21 (DE3) containing pET28a (vector, red line) and pTG3044 (bearing sacH, black line).Figure 2 Figure 2Biochemical characterizations of SacH-mediated self-resistance. (A) SfmC-SacH cascade enzymatic reactions. (B) LC‒MS analysis of the enzymatic reaction products: I, EIC of m/z = 705.5 for 11 generated by SfmC; II, EIC of m/z = 707.5 for 12 generated by SacH. (C) ESI-MS analysis of 11 and 12. (D) Enzymatic reaction using SAC-B as the substrate. (E) HPLC analysis of the reactions in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, enzymatic reaction with SacH; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, SAC-A standard. (F) Comparison of the antibacterial activity of SAC-B against E. coli BL21 (DE3) containing pET28a (vector, red line) and pTG3044 (bearing sacH, black line).Figure 2 Figure 2Biochemical characterizations of SacH-mediated self-resistance. (A) SfmC-SacH cascade enzymatic reactions. (B) LC‒MS analysis of the enzymatic reaction products: I, EIC of m/z = 705.5 for 11 generated by SfmC; II, EIC of m/z = 707.5 for 12 generated by SacH. (C) ESI-MS analysis of 11 and 12. (D) Enzymatic reaction using SAC-B as the substrate. (E) HPLC analysis of the reactions in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, enzymatic reaction with SacH; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, SAC-A standard. (F) Comparison of the antibacterial activity of SAC-B against E. coli BL21 (DE3) containing pET28a (vector, red line) and pTG3044 (bearing sacH, black line).Figure 2 Biochemical characterizations of SacH-mediated self-resistance. (A) SfmC-SacH cascade enzymatic reactions. (B) LC‒MS analysis of the enzymatic reaction products: I, EIC of m/z = 705.5 for 11 generated by SfmC; II, EIC of m/z = 707.5 for 12 generated by SacH. (C) ESI-MS analysis of 11 and 12. (D) Enzymatic reaction using SAC-B as the substrate. (E) HPLC analysis of the reactions in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, enzymatic reaction with SacH; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, SAC-A standard. (F) Comparison of the antibacterial activity of SAC-B against E. coli BL21 (DE3) containing pET28a (vector, red line) and pTG3044 (bearing sacH, black line). Biochemical characterizations of SacH-mediated self-resistance. (A) SfmC-SacH cascade enzymatic reactions. (B) LC‒MS analysis of the enzymatic reaction products: I, EIC of m/z = 705.5 for 11 generated by SfmC; II, EIC of m/z = 707.5 for 12 generated by SacH. (C) ESI-MS analysis of 11 and 12. (D) Enzymatic reaction using SAC-B as the substrate. (E) HPLC analysis of the reactions in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, enzymatic reaction with SacH; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, SAC-A standard. (F) Comparison of the antibacterial activity of SAC-B against E. coli BL21 (DE3) containing pET28a (vector, red line) and pTG3044 (bearing sacH, black line). Biochemical characterizations of SacH-mediated self-resistance. (A) SfmC-SacH cascade enzymatic reactions. (B) LC‒MS analysis of the enzymatic reaction products: I, EIC of m/z = 705.5 for 11 generated by SfmC; II, EIC of m/z = 707.5 for 12 generated by SacH. (C) ESI-MS analysis of 11 and 12. (D) Enzymatic reaction using SAC-B as the substrate. (E) HPLC analysis of the reactions in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, enzymatic reaction with SacH; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, SAC-A standard. (F) Comparison of the antibacterial activity of SAC-B against E. coli BL21 (DE3) containing pET28a (vector, red line) and pTG3044 (bearing sacH, black line). Then, we characterized the enzymatic properties of SacH. Its optimum pH value is around 6.5 (Supporting Information Fig. S3), and optimum temperature is around 42 °C (Supporting Information Fig. S4). When SAC-B was used as the substrate, this enzyme exhibits Km value of 81.37 ± 2.53 μmol/L and kcat/Km of 1.06 L/(μmol·s) (Supporting Information Fig. S5). Then, we characterized the enzymatic properties of SacH. Its optimum pH value is around 6.5 (Supporting Information Fig. S3), and optimum temperature is around 42 °C (Supporting Information Fig. S4). When SAC-B was used as the substrate, this enzyme exhibits Km value of 81.37 ± 2.53 μmol/L and kcat/Km of 1.06 L/(μmol·s) (Supporting Information Fig. S5). Then, we characterized the enzymatic properties of SacH. Its optimum pH value is around 6.5 (Supporting Information Fig. S3), and optimum temperature is around 42 °C (Supporting Information Fig. S4). When SAC-B was used as the substrate, this enzyme exhibits Km value of 81.37 ± 2.53 μmol/L and kcat/Km of 1.06 L/(μmol·s) (Supporting Information Fig. S5). Co-factor dependence evaluation showed that SacH can utilize both NADH and NADPH as H-donors (Supporting Information Fig. S6), distinct from typical DHFRs that only use NADPH. To further understand the enzymatic reaction, the assay was performed in the presence of (R)-[4-2H]-NADPH or (S)-[4-2H]-NADPH, which were produced by coupling with glucose dehydrogenase (GDH) from Bacillus megaterium DSM 2894 (BmGDH) or GDH from Thermoplasma acidophilum ATCC 25905 (TaGDH), respectively, using d-[1–2H]-glucose as the substrate18,19. LC‒MS analysis of the reaction products (Supporting Information Fig. S7) showed that a 1 Da-shifted fragment ion was only observed in SacH/TaGDH coupled assay with (R)-[4-2H]-NADPH as a cofactor. This phenomenon is the same as typical DHFRs using the C4-pro-R hydrogen of NADPH to reduce substrate, but different from that of SDR-mediated reduction of hemiaminal pharmacophore, which utilizes C4-pro-S hydrogen of NADPH to reduce the reactive iminium species13. Co-factor dependence evaluation showed that SacH can utilize both NADH and NADPH as H-donors (Supporting Information Fig. S6), distinct from typical DHFRs that only use NADPH. To further understand the enzymatic reaction, the assay was performed in the presence of (R)-[4-2H]-NADPH or (S)-[4-2H]-NADPH, which were produced by coupling with glucose dehydrogenase (GDH) from Bacillus megaterium DSM 2894 (BmGDH) or GDH from Thermoplasma acidophilum ATCC 25905 (TaGDH), respectively, using d-[1–2H]-glucose as the substrate18,19. LC‒MS analysis of the reaction products (Supporting Information Fig. S7) showed that a 1 Da-shifted fragment ion was only observed in SacH/TaGDH coupled assay with (R)-[4-2H]-NADPH as a cofactor. This phenomenon is the same as typical DHFRs using the C4-pro-R hydrogen of NADPH to reduce substrate, but different from that of SDR-mediated reduction of hemiaminal pharmacophore, which utilizes C4-pro-S hydrogen of NADPH to reduce the reactive iminium species13. Co-factor dependence evaluation showed that SacH can utilize both NADH and NADPH as H-donors (Supporting Information Fig. S6), distinct from typical DHFRs that only use NADPH. To further understand the enzymatic reaction, the assay was performed in the presence of (R)-[4-2H]-NADPH or (S)-[4-2H]-NADPH, which were produced by coupling with glucose dehydrogenase (GDH) from Bacillus megaterium DSM 2894 (BmGDH) or GDH from Thermoplasma acidophilum ATCC 25905 (TaGDH), respectively, using d-[1–2H]-glucose as the substrate18,19. LC‒MS analysis of the reaction products (Supporting Information Fig. S7) showed that a 1 Da-shifted fragment ion was only observed in SacH/TaGDH coupled assay with (R)-[4-2H]-NADPH as a cofactor. This phenomenon is the same as typical DHFRs using the C4-pro-R hydrogen of NADPH to reduce substrate, but different from that of SDR-mediated reduction of hemiaminal pharmacophore, which utilizes C4-pro-S hydrogen of NADPH to reduce the reactive iminium species13. The reduction of other hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing THIQ compounds catalyzed by SacH The reduction of other hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing THIQ compounds catalyzed by SacH The reduction of other hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing THIQ compounds catalyzed by SacH Considering the SfmO1-like SDRs exhibit excellent substrate tolerance, we similarly used ET-743 and NDM as substrates to assay SacH-catalyzed reactions. SacH shows effectively reductive activity towards either ET-743 or NDM (Fig. 3). This result further supports that DHFR-like protein SacH from P. fluorescens plays the key role in reductively inactivating the hemiaminal pharmacophore for self-resistance with broad substrate scope, which functionally resembles SfmO1 in SFM biosynthesis from S. lavendulae.Figure 3Biochemical characterizations of SacH-catalyzed reactions with other THIQ alkaloids. (A) Enzymatic reaction with ET-743 as the substrate. (B) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (A) with UV at 270 nm: I, ET-743 standard; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, enzymatic reaction with SacH, and the production of 5 was confirmed by MS. (C) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, dH-NDM standard; II, NDM standard; III, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; IV, enzymatic reaction with SacH. (D) Enzymatic reaction with NDM as the substrate.Figure 3 Considering the SfmO1-like SDRs exhibit excellent substrate tolerance, we similarly used ET-743 and NDM as substrates to assay SacH-catalyzed reactions. SacH shows effectively reductive activity towards either ET-743 or NDM (Fig. 3). This result further supports that DHFR-like protein SacH from P. fluorescens plays the key role in reductively inactivating the hemiaminal pharmacophore for self-resistance with broad substrate scope, which functionally resembles SfmO1 in SFM biosynthesis from S. lavendulae.Figure 3Biochemical characterizations of SacH-catalyzed reactions with other THIQ alkaloids. (A) Enzymatic reaction with ET-743 as the substrate. (B) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (A) with UV at 270 nm: I, ET-743 standard; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, enzymatic reaction with SacH, and the production of 5 was confirmed by MS. (C) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, dH-NDM standard; II, NDM standard; III, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; IV, enzymatic reaction with SacH. (D) Enzymatic reaction with NDM as the substrate.Figure 3 Considering the SfmO1-like SDRs exhibit excellent substrate tolerance, we similarly used ET-743 and NDM as substrates to assay SacH-catalyzed reactions. SacH shows effectively reductive activity towards either ET-743 or NDM (Fig. 3). This result further supports that DHFR-like protein SacH from P. fluorescens plays the key role in reductively inactivating the hemiaminal pharmacophore for self-resistance with broad substrate scope, which functionally resembles SfmO1 in SFM biosynthesis from S. lavendulae.Figure 3Biochemical characterizations of SacH-catalyzed reactions with other THIQ alkaloids. (A) Enzymatic reaction with ET-743 as the substrate. (B) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (A) with UV at 270 nm: I, ET-743 standard; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, enzymatic reaction with SacH, and the production of 5 was confirmed by MS. (C) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, dH-NDM standard; II, NDM standard; III, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; IV, enzymatic reaction with SacH. (D) Enzymatic reaction with NDM as the substrate.Figure 3 Figure 3Biochemical characterizations of SacH-catalyzed reactions with other THIQ alkaloids. (A) Enzymatic reaction with ET-743 as the substrate. (B) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (A) with UV at 270 nm: I, ET-743 standard; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, enzymatic reaction with SacH, and the production of 5 was confirmed by MS. (C) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, dH-NDM standard; II, NDM standard; III, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; IV, enzymatic reaction with SacH. (D) Enzymatic reaction with NDM as the substrate.Figure 3 Figure 3Biochemical characterizations of SacH-catalyzed reactions with other THIQ alkaloids. (A) Enzymatic reaction with ET-743 as the substrate. (B) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (A) with UV at 270 nm: I, ET-743 standard; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, enzymatic reaction with SacH, and the production of 5 was confirmed by MS. (C) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, dH-NDM standard; II, NDM standard; III, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; IV, enzymatic reaction with SacH. (D) Enzymatic reaction with NDM as the substrate.Figure 3 Figure 3Biochemical characterizations of SacH-catalyzed reactions with other THIQ alkaloids. (A) Enzymatic reaction with ET-743 as the substrate. (B) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (A) with UV at 270 nm: I, ET-743 standard; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, enzymatic reaction with SacH, and the production of 5 was confirmed by MS. (C) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, dH-NDM standard; II, NDM standard; III, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; IV, enzymatic reaction with SacH. (D) Enzymatic reaction with NDM as the substrate.Figure 3 Biochemical characterizations of SacH-catalyzed reactions with other THIQ alkaloids. (A) Enzymatic reaction with ET-743 as the substrate. (B) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (A) with UV at 270 nm: I, ET-743 standard; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, enzymatic reaction with SacH, and the production of 5 was confirmed by MS. (C) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, dH-NDM standard; II, NDM standard; III, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; IV, enzymatic reaction with SacH. (D) Enzymatic reaction with NDM as the substrate. Biochemical characterizations of SacH-catalyzed reactions with other THIQ alkaloids. (A) Enzymatic reaction with ET-743 as the substrate. (B) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (A) with UV at 270 nm: I, ET-743 standard; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, enzymatic reaction with SacH, and the production of 5 was confirmed by MS. (C) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, dH-NDM standard; II, NDM standard; III, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; IV, enzymatic reaction with SacH. (D) Enzymatic reaction with NDM as the substrate. Biochemical characterizations of SacH-catalyzed reactions with other THIQ alkaloids. (A) Enzymatic reaction with ET-743 as the substrate. (B) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (A) with UV at 270 nm: I, ET-743 standard; II, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; III, enzymatic reaction with SacH, and the production of 5 was confirmed by MS. (C) HPLC analysis of the reaction in (D) with UV at 270 nm: I, dH-NDM standard; II, NDM standard; III, enzymatic reaction with boiled SacH; IV, enzymatic reaction with SacH. (D) Enzymatic reaction with NDM as the substrate. Analysis of SacH crystal structure Analysis of SacH crystal structure Analysis of SacH crystal structure To further explore the enzymatic mechanism, the complex crystal structure of SacH with NADPH (designated SacH−NADPH, Supporting Information Fig. S8), and complex structure of SacH with both NADPH and SAC-A (designated SacH−NADPH−SAC-A) were solved (Fig. 4A). The SacH−NADPH structure was solved at 2.80 Å by molecular replacement method using the structure of putative reductase MS0308 (PDB ID: 2XW7) from Mycobacterium smegmatis as the searching model, and the SacH−NADPH−SAC-A structure was solved at 2.60 Å by molecular replacement using SacH−NADPH as the searching model. Structural comparison showed that these two structures are almost identical (Fig. S8b, we use SacH−NADPH−SAC-A for following structural analyses), with root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) 0.248 Å for Cα atoms. SacH possesses a typical mixed α/β fold of DHFRs, showing eight central β-strands (strands β1‒β8) flanked by five helices (α1–α5) (Fig. 4A). To further explore the enzymatic mechanism, the complex crystal structure of SacH with NADPH (designated SacH−NADPH, Supporting Information Fig. S8), and complex structure of SacH with both NADPH and SAC-A (designated SacH−NADPH−SAC-A) were solved (Fig. 4A). The SacH−NADPH structure was solved at 2.80 Å by molecular replacement method using the structure of putative reductase MS0308 (PDB ID: 2XW7) from Mycobacterium smegmatis as the searching model, and the SacH−NADPH−SAC-A structure was solved at 2.60 Å by molecular replacement using SacH−NADPH as the searching model. Structural comparison showed that these two structures are almost identical (Fig. S8b, we use SacH−NADPH−SAC-A for following structural analyses), with root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) 0.248 Å for Cα atoms. SacH possesses a typical mixed α/β fold of DHFRs, showing eight central β-strands (strands β1‒β8) flanked by five helices (α1–α5) (Fig. 4A). To further explore the enzymatic mechanism, the complex crystal structure of SacH with NADPH (designated SacH−NADPH, Supporting Information Fig. S8), and complex structure of SacH with both NADPH and SAC-A (designated SacH−NADPH−SAC-A) were solved (Fig. 4A). The SacH−NADPH structure was solved at 2.80 Å by molecular replacement method using the structure of putative reductase MS0308 (PDB ID: 2XW7) from Mycobacterium smegmatis as the searching model, and the SacH−NADPH−SAC-A structure was solved at 2.60 Å by molecular replacement using SacH−NADPH as the searching model. Structural comparison showed that these two structures are almost identical (Fig. S8b, we use SacH−NADPH−SAC-A for following structural analyses), with root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) 0.248 Å for Cα atoms. SacH possesses a typical mixed α/β fold of DHFRs, showing eight central β-strands (strands β1‒β8) flanked by five helices (α1–α5) (Fig. 4A). Although SacH and DHFRs share similar structural fold, there are some obvious differences between their secondary structures (using a typical DHFR from Coxiella burnetii in complex with folate as example, PDB ID: 3TQB20) (Fig. 4). Among them, the α2 helix of SacH corresponding to the α1 helix of the DHFR is much shorter, meanwhile the Met20 loop, which is a conservative loop covering the substrate binding site in DHFRs, is much longer (residues 15–43) than that in the DHFR (residues 9–24), thereby leading to a larger substrate binding pocket. The Met20 loop in SacH contains a small α-helix (α1) in the middle rather than a small β-strand (β2) in the DHFR. These differences contribute to the different substrate selectivities between SacH and DHFRs mentioned below. Comparing the structure with NapW (PDB ID: 7BTM)13, a SDR catalyzing similar reduction reaction, SacH possesses a completely distinct structural fold (Fig. S8), suggesting a different catalytic mechanism from SDRs.Figure 4Crystal structures of SacH and a typical DHFR. (A) The overall structure of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. (B) The overall structure of a DHFR (PDB ID: 3TQB). The NADPH is shown in orange sticks. SAC-A and folate are shown in yellow and blue sticks, respectively. The Met20 loops are labelled in red for both SacH and DHFR.Figure 4 Although SacH and DHFRs share similar structural fold, there are some obvious differences between their secondary structures (using a typical DHFR from Coxiella burnetii in complex with folate as example, PDB ID: 3TQB20) (Fig. 4). Among them, the α2 helix of SacH corresponding to the α1 helix of the DHFR is much shorter, meanwhile the Met20 loop, which is a conservative loop covering the substrate binding site in DHFRs, is much longer (residues 15–43) than that in the DHFR (residues 9–24), thereby leading to a larger substrate binding pocket. The Met20 loop in SacH contains a small α-helix (α1) in the middle rather than a small β-strand (β2) in the DHFR. These differences contribute to the different substrate selectivities between SacH and DHFRs mentioned below. Comparing the structure with NapW (PDB ID: 7BTM)13, a SDR catalyzing similar reduction reaction, SacH possesses a completely distinct structural fold (Fig. S8), suggesting a different catalytic mechanism from SDRs.Figure 4Crystal structures of SacH and a typical DHFR. (A) The overall structure of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. (B) The overall structure of a DHFR (PDB ID: 3TQB). The NADPH is shown in orange sticks. SAC-A and folate are shown in yellow and blue sticks, respectively. The Met20 loops are labelled in red for both SacH and DHFR.Figure 4 Although SacH and DHFRs share similar structural fold, there are some obvious differences between their secondary structures (using a typical DHFR from Coxiella burnetii in complex with folate as example, PDB ID: 3TQB20) (Fig. 4). Among them, the α2 helix of SacH corresponding to the α1 helix of the DHFR is much shorter, meanwhile the Met20 loop, which is a conservative loop covering the substrate binding site in DHFRs, is much longer (residues 15–43) than that in the DHFR (residues 9–24), thereby leading to a larger substrate binding pocket. The Met20 loop in SacH contains a small α-helix (α1) in the middle rather than a small β-strand (β2) in the DHFR. These differences contribute to the different substrate selectivities between SacH and DHFRs mentioned below. Comparing the structure with NapW (PDB ID: 7BTM)13, a SDR catalyzing similar reduction reaction, SacH possesses a completely distinct structural fold (Fig. S8), suggesting a different catalytic mechanism from SDRs.Figure 4Crystal structures of SacH and a typical DHFR. (A) The overall structure of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. (B) The overall structure of a DHFR (PDB ID: 3TQB). The NADPH is shown in orange sticks. SAC-A and folate are shown in yellow and blue sticks, respectively. The Met20 loops are labelled in red for both SacH and DHFR.Figure 4 Figure 4Crystal structures of SacH and a typical DHFR. (A) The overall structure of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. (B) The overall structure of a DHFR (PDB ID: 3TQB). The NADPH is shown in orange sticks. SAC-A and folate are shown in yellow and blue sticks, respectively. The Met20 loops are labelled in red for both SacH and DHFR.Figure 4 Figure 4Crystal structures of SacH and a typical DHFR. (A) The overall structure of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. (B) The overall structure of a DHFR (PDB ID: 3TQB). The NADPH is shown in orange sticks. SAC-A and folate are shown in yellow and blue sticks, respectively. The Met20 loops are labelled in red for both SacH and DHFR.Figure 4 Figure 4Crystal structures of SacH and a typical DHFR. (A) The overall structure of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. (B) The overall structure of a DHFR (PDB ID: 3TQB). The NADPH is shown in orange sticks. SAC-A and folate are shown in yellow and blue sticks, respectively. The Met20 loops are labelled in red for both SacH and DHFR.Figure 4 Crystal structures of SacH and a typical DHFR. (A) The overall structure of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. (B) The overall structure of a DHFR (PDB ID: 3TQB). The NADPH is shown in orange sticks. SAC-A and folate are shown in yellow and blue sticks, respectively. The Met20 loops are labelled in red for both SacH and DHFR. Crystal structures of SacH and a typical DHFR. (A) The overall structure of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. (B) The overall structure of a DHFR (PDB ID: 3TQB). The NADPH is shown in orange sticks. SAC-A and folate are shown in yellow and blue sticks, respectively. The Met20 loops are labelled in red for both SacH and DHFR. Crystal structures of SacH and a typical DHFR. (A) The overall structure of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. (B) The overall structure of a DHFR (PDB ID: 3TQB). The NADPH is shown in orange sticks. SAC-A and folate are shown in yellow and blue sticks, respectively. The Met20 loops are labelled in red for both SacH and DHFR. The binding of NADPH to SacH is facilitated by a network of hydrogen bonded and hydrophobic interactions (Supporting Information Fig. S9). Adjacent to NADPH, SAC-A binds to key residues in the active site of SacH: SAC-A forms several hydrogen bonds with Ala9, Glu27, Tyr38 and Tyr68; and hydrophobic interactions with Leu23, Leu26, Trp57 and Thr136 (Fig. 5A and Supporting Information Fig. S10). Notably, the Tyr38 and Tyr68 not only form hydrogen bonds with SAC-A, but also provide steric hindrance pushing SAC-A towards NADPH (Fig. 5A). Detailed analysis between the positions of NADPH and SAC-A clearly shows that the C4-pro-R hydrogen of NADPH is close to the C21 of SAC-A, and takes the similar position as the leaving C21-hydroxy group (Fig. 5B), which is consistent with [4-2H]-NADPH assay results and the stereoselective reduction by SacH. The binding of NADPH to SacH is facilitated by a network of hydrogen bonded and hydrophobic interactions (Supporting Information Fig. S9). Adjacent to NADPH, SAC-A binds to key residues in the active site of SacH: SAC-A forms several hydrogen bonds with Ala9, Glu27, Tyr38 and Tyr68; and hydrophobic interactions with Leu23, Leu26, Trp57 and Thr136 (Fig. 5A and Supporting Information Fig. S10). Notably, the Tyr38 and Tyr68 not only form hydrogen bonds with SAC-A, but also provide steric hindrance pushing SAC-A towards NADPH (Fig. 5A). Detailed analysis between the positions of NADPH and SAC-A clearly shows that the C4-pro-R hydrogen of NADPH is close to the C21 of SAC-A, and takes the similar position as the leaving C21-hydroxy group (Fig. 5B), which is consistent with [4-2H]-NADPH assay results and the stereoselective reduction by SacH. The binding of NADPH to SacH is facilitated by a network of hydrogen bonded and hydrophobic interactions (Supporting Information Fig. S9). Adjacent to NADPH, SAC-A binds to key residues in the active site of SacH: SAC-A forms several hydrogen bonds with Ala9, Glu27, Tyr38 and Tyr68; and hydrophobic interactions with Leu23, Leu26, Trp57 and Thr136 (Fig. 5A and Supporting Information Fig. S10). Notably, the Tyr38 and Tyr68 not only form hydrogen bonds with SAC-A, but also provide steric hindrance pushing SAC-A towards NADPH (Fig. 5A). Detailed analysis between the positions of NADPH and SAC-A clearly shows that the C4-pro-R hydrogen of NADPH is close to the C21 of SAC-A, and takes the similar position as the leaving C21-hydroxy group (Fig. 5B), which is consistent with [4-2H]-NADPH assay results and the stereoselective reduction by SacH. Proposed mechanism for the reduction of hemiaminal pharmacophore catalyzed by SacH Proposed mechanism for the reduction of hemiaminal pharmacophore catalyzed by SacH Proposed mechanism for the reduction of hemiaminal pharmacophore catalyzed by SacH To confirm the key roles of active site residues, we carried out site-mutagenesis experiments. As expected, single mutation to alanine for the residues related to SAC-A binding caused decreased or no activities, in which T136A mutant completely lost the activity (Supporting Information Fig. S11). Double mutants E27A/Y38A, E27A/Y68A, and Y38A/Y68A also completely abolished the activity. Interestingly, the T136V and T136L mutants can restore the activity, while T136S not, suggesting that Thr136 mainly provides steric hindrance to stabilize the substrate close to NADPH, instead of by the hydrogen bond. Other mutants including T136F, T136D, and T136W abolished the activity, suggesting that these longer or larger residues are not allowed for a suitable substrate binding. It has been proved that the hydroxy group in THIQ antibiotics can spontaneously leave in acidic solution, to form the electrophilic iminium species10, whose binding style may resemble that of SAC-A in the active site. Thus, these combined hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions in the active site confine SAC-A (or substrate) in a specific conformation that only allow the hydride from NADPH attacks C21 in a stereoselective way (Fig. 5).Figure 5The active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A and enzymatic mechanism. (A) The binding of SAC-A (yellow stick) in the active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. NADPH is shown in magenta stick. (B) The amplified region for the reductive reaction. SAC-A and NADPH are shown in yellow and magenta sticks, respectively. (C) Catalytic mechanism of SacH in the reduction of THIQ compounds.Figure 5 To confirm the key roles of active site residues, we carried out site-mutagenesis experiments. As expected, single mutation to alanine for the residues related to SAC-A binding caused decreased or no activities, in which T136A mutant completely lost the activity (Supporting Information Fig. S11). Double mutants E27A/Y38A, E27A/Y68A, and Y38A/Y68A also completely abolished the activity. Interestingly, the T136V and T136L mutants can restore the activity, while T136S not, suggesting that Thr136 mainly provides steric hindrance to stabilize the substrate close to NADPH, instead of by the hydrogen bond. Other mutants including T136F, T136D, and T136W abolished the activity, suggesting that these longer or larger residues are not allowed for a suitable substrate binding. It has been proved that the hydroxy group in THIQ antibiotics can spontaneously leave in acidic solution, to form the electrophilic iminium species10, whose binding style may resemble that of SAC-A in the active site. Thus, these combined hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions in the active site confine SAC-A (or substrate) in a specific conformation that only allow the hydride from NADPH attacks C21 in a stereoselective way (Fig. 5).Figure 5The active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A and enzymatic mechanism. (A) The binding of SAC-A (yellow stick) in the active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. NADPH is shown in magenta stick. (B) The amplified region for the reductive reaction. SAC-A and NADPH are shown in yellow and magenta sticks, respectively. (C) Catalytic mechanism of SacH in the reduction of THIQ compounds.Figure 5 To confirm the key roles of active site residues, we carried out site-mutagenesis experiments. As expected, single mutation to alanine for the residues related to SAC-A binding caused decreased or no activities, in which T136A mutant completely lost the activity (Supporting Information Fig. S11). Double mutants E27A/Y38A, E27A/Y68A, and Y38A/Y68A also completely abolished the activity. Interestingly, the T136V and T136L mutants can restore the activity, while T136S not, suggesting that Thr136 mainly provides steric hindrance to stabilize the substrate close to NADPH, instead of by the hydrogen bond. Other mutants including T136F, T136D, and T136W abolished the activity, suggesting that these longer or larger residues are not allowed for a suitable substrate binding. It has been proved that the hydroxy group in THIQ antibiotics can spontaneously leave in acidic solution, to form the electrophilic iminium species10, whose binding style may resemble that of SAC-A in the active site. Thus, these combined hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions in the active site confine SAC-A (or substrate) in a specific conformation that only allow the hydride from NADPH attacks C21 in a stereoselective way (Fig. 5).Figure 5The active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A and enzymatic mechanism. (A) The binding of SAC-A (yellow stick) in the active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. NADPH is shown in magenta stick. (B) The amplified region for the reductive reaction. SAC-A and NADPH are shown in yellow and magenta sticks, respectively. (C) Catalytic mechanism of SacH in the reduction of THIQ compounds.Figure 5 Figure 5The active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A and enzymatic mechanism. (A) The binding of SAC-A (yellow stick) in the active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. NADPH is shown in magenta stick. (B) The amplified region for the reductive reaction. SAC-A and NADPH are shown in yellow and magenta sticks, respectively. (C) Catalytic mechanism of SacH in the reduction of THIQ compounds.Figure 5 Figure 5The active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A and enzymatic mechanism. (A) The binding of SAC-A (yellow stick) in the active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. NADPH is shown in magenta stick. (B) The amplified region for the reductive reaction. SAC-A and NADPH are shown in yellow and magenta sticks, respectively. (C) Catalytic mechanism of SacH in the reduction of THIQ compounds.Figure 5 Figure 5The active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A and enzymatic mechanism. (A) The binding of SAC-A (yellow stick) in the active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. NADPH is shown in magenta stick. (B) The amplified region for the reductive reaction. SAC-A and NADPH are shown in yellow and magenta sticks, respectively. (C) Catalytic mechanism of SacH in the reduction of THIQ compounds.Figure 5 The active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A and enzymatic mechanism. (A) The binding of SAC-A (yellow stick) in the active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. NADPH is shown in magenta stick. (B) The amplified region for the reductive reaction. SAC-A and NADPH are shown in yellow and magenta sticks, respectively. (C) Catalytic mechanism of SacH in the reduction of THIQ compounds. The active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A and enzymatic mechanism. (A) The binding of SAC-A (yellow stick) in the active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. NADPH is shown in magenta stick. (B) The amplified region for the reductive reaction. SAC-A and NADPH are shown in yellow and magenta sticks, respectively. (C) Catalytic mechanism of SacH in the reduction of THIQ compounds. The active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A and enzymatic mechanism. (A) The binding of SAC-A (yellow stick) in the active site of SacH−NADPH−SAC-A. NADPH is shown in magenta stick. (B) The amplified region for the reductive reaction. SAC-A and NADPH are shown in yellow and magenta sticks, respectively. (C) Catalytic mechanism of SacH in the reduction of THIQ compounds. To investigate the structural basis of SacH's substrate promiscuities for THIQ antibiotics, we modelled their iminium ion intermediates into the active site of SacH by AutoDock Vina. All of four iminium ion intermediate-substrates bind to SacH in similar styles as SAC-A, with reduction positions close to NADPH and other parts towards outside of the substrate binding pockets (Fig. 6). The substrate promiscuity of SacH is largely attributed to its large substrate binding pocket (Fig. 4A), which can allow the accommodation of THIQs with different size and skeleton modifications, even for the long-chain fatty acyl group-containing 11 (Fig. 6B).Figure 6Comparison of the binding modes of SacH with different THIQs. The modelling of iminium ion intermediates for SAC-B (A), 11 (B), ET-743 (C) and NDM (D) into the active site of SacH−NADPH (grey cartoon). NADPH are shown in magenta sticks, and the reduction sites in iminium ion intermediates (different coloured sticks) are indicated with red arrows.Figure 6 To investigate the structural basis of SacH's substrate promiscuities for THIQ antibiotics, we modelled their iminium ion intermediates into the active site of SacH by AutoDock Vina. All of four iminium ion intermediate-substrates bind to SacH in similar styles as SAC-A, with reduction positions close to NADPH and other parts towards outside of the substrate binding pockets (Fig. 6). The substrate promiscuity of SacH is largely attributed to its large substrate binding pocket (Fig. 4A), which can allow the accommodation of THIQs with different size and skeleton modifications, even for the long-chain fatty acyl group-containing 11 (Fig. 6B).Figure 6Comparison of the binding modes of SacH with different THIQs. The modelling of iminium ion intermediates for SAC-B (A), 11 (B), ET-743 (C) and NDM (D) into the active site of SacH−NADPH (grey cartoon). NADPH are shown in magenta sticks, and the reduction sites in iminium ion intermediates (different coloured sticks) are indicated with red arrows.Figure 6 To investigate the structural basis of SacH's substrate promiscuities for THIQ antibiotics, we modelled their iminium ion intermediates into the active site of SacH by AutoDock Vina. All of four iminium ion intermediate-substrates bind to SacH in similar styles as SAC-A, with reduction positions close to NADPH and other parts towards outside of the substrate binding pockets (Fig. 6). The substrate promiscuity of SacH is largely attributed to its large substrate binding pocket (Fig. 4A), which can allow the accommodation of THIQs with different size and skeleton modifications, even for the long-chain fatty acyl group-containing 11 (Fig. 6B).Figure 6Comparison of the binding modes of SacH with different THIQs. The modelling of iminium ion intermediates for SAC-B (A), 11 (B), ET-743 (C) and NDM (D) into the active site of SacH−NADPH (grey cartoon). NADPH are shown in magenta sticks, and the reduction sites in iminium ion intermediates (different coloured sticks) are indicated with red arrows.Figure 6 Figure 6Comparison of the binding modes of SacH with different THIQs. The modelling of iminium ion intermediates for SAC-B (A), 11 (B), ET-743 (C) and NDM (D) into the active site of SacH−NADPH (grey cartoon). NADPH are shown in magenta sticks, and the reduction sites in iminium ion intermediates (different coloured sticks) are indicated with red arrows.Figure 6 Figure 6Comparison of the binding modes of SacH with different THIQs. The modelling of iminium ion intermediates for SAC-B (A), 11 (B), ET-743 (C) and NDM (D) into the active site of SacH−NADPH (grey cartoon). NADPH are shown in magenta sticks, and the reduction sites in iminium ion intermediates (different coloured sticks) are indicated with red arrows.Figure 6 Figure 6Comparison of the binding modes of SacH with different THIQs. The modelling of iminium ion intermediates for SAC-B (A), 11 (B), ET-743 (C) and NDM (D) into the active site of SacH−NADPH (grey cartoon). NADPH are shown in magenta sticks, and the reduction sites in iminium ion intermediates (different coloured sticks) are indicated with red arrows.Figure 6 Comparison of the binding modes of SacH with different THIQs. The modelling of iminium ion intermediates for SAC-B (A), 11 (B), ET-743 (C) and NDM (D) into the active site of SacH−NADPH (grey cartoon). NADPH are shown in magenta sticks, and the reduction sites in iminium ion intermediates (different coloured sticks) are indicated with red arrows. Comparison of the binding modes of SacH with different THIQs. The modelling of iminium ion intermediates for SAC-B (A), 11 (B), ET-743 (C) and NDM (D) into the active site of SacH−NADPH (grey cartoon). NADPH are shown in magenta sticks, and the reduction sites in iminium ion intermediates (different coloured sticks) are indicated with red arrows. Comparison of the binding modes of SacH with different THIQs. The modelling of iminium ion intermediates for SAC-B (A), 11 (B), ET-743 (C) and NDM (D) into the active site of SacH−NADPH (grey cartoon). NADPH are shown in magenta sticks, and the reduction sites in iminium ion intermediates (different coloured sticks) are indicated with red arrows. Biochemical characterization of SacH homologous proteins Biochemical characterization of SacH homologous proteins Biochemical characterization of SacH homologous proteins The alignment of eight SacH homologs (Supporting Information Table S6) from different microorganisms randomly selected from non-redundant protein sequences database indicated that the Thr136 is conserved (Supporting Information Fig. S12), thereby suggesting a significant role of this residue in the enzymatic reaction. The neighbor-joining unrooted phylogenetic tree including SacH, its homologs mentioned above, characterized DHFRs, bifunctional deaminase-reductase RibDs (structural homolog of DHFR), and the reductase domain of the RibDs, has revealed that SacH and its homologs are in the new branch and more related to the RibDs (Supporting Information Fig. S13). The enzymatic assays for SacH homologs and FolA (DHFR from E. coli as control, EGC93834.1) indicated that they couldn't reduce DHF to THF as FolA does (Supporting Information Fig. S14), probably owing to the significant differences in substrate binding cavities between SacH and DHFRs (Fig. 4); however, all SacH homologs could reduce THIQ compounds (Supporting Information Figs. S15‒S17), and FolA even showed some catalytic activity towards THIQ family compounds (Supporting Information Fig. S18). It showed how ingenious the microbe is as it uses SacH and its homologs to reduce the hemiaminal pharmacophore and protect itself from DNA alkylation damage while ensuring the concentration of THF in the cell not be affected. Sequence similarity network (SSN) analysis (Supporting Information Fig. S19) indicated that SacH homologs are widely existed in the phylum proteobacteria and actinobacteria, which indicates the extensive presence of reductive detoxification toward hemiaminal pharmacophore. The co-existence of self-resistance genes with biosynthetic genes have been reported in other studies, and the presence of self-resistance gene could guide the discovery of bioactive natural products with specific biological activity21, 22, 23, 24. Given the fact that SacH and its homologs represent a new group of DHFR enzymes possessing self-resistance functions, the mining of sacH homologs may benefit the discovery of new antibiotics with hemiaminal pharmacophore. The alignment of eight SacH homologs (Supporting Information Table S6) from different microorganisms randomly selected from non-redundant protein sequences database indicated that the Thr136 is conserved (Supporting Information Fig. S12), thereby suggesting a significant role of this residue in the enzymatic reaction. The neighbor-joining unrooted phylogenetic tree including SacH, its homologs mentioned above, characterized DHFRs, bifunctional deaminase-reductase RibDs (structural homolog of DHFR), and the reductase domain of the RibDs, has revealed that SacH and its homologs are in the new branch and more related to the RibDs (Supporting Information Fig. S13). The enzymatic assays for SacH homologs and FolA (DHFR from E. coli as control, EGC93834.1) indicated that they couldn't reduce DHF to THF as FolA does (Supporting Information Fig. S14), probably owing to the significant differences in substrate binding cavities between SacH and DHFRs (Fig. 4); however, all SacH homologs could reduce THIQ compounds (Supporting Information Figs. S15‒S17), and FolA even showed some catalytic activity towards THIQ family compounds (Supporting Information Fig. S18). It showed how ingenious the microbe is as it uses SacH and its homologs to reduce the hemiaminal pharmacophore and protect itself from DNA alkylation damage while ensuring the concentration of THF in the cell not be affected. Sequence similarity network (SSN) analysis (Supporting Information Fig. S19) indicated that SacH homologs are widely existed in the phylum proteobacteria and actinobacteria, which indicates the extensive presence of reductive detoxification toward hemiaminal pharmacophore. The co-existence of self-resistance genes with biosynthetic genes have been reported in other studies, and the presence of self-resistance gene could guide the discovery of bioactive natural products with specific biological activity21, 22, 23, 24. Given the fact that SacH and its homologs represent a new group of DHFR enzymes possessing self-resistance functions, the mining of sacH homologs may benefit the discovery of new antibiotics with hemiaminal pharmacophore. The alignment of eight SacH homologs (Supporting Information Table S6) from different microorganisms randomly selected from non-redundant protein sequences database indicated that the Thr136 is conserved (Supporting Information Fig. S12), thereby suggesting a significant role of this residue in the enzymatic reaction. The neighbor-joining unrooted phylogenetic tree including SacH, its homologs mentioned above, characterized DHFRs, bifunctional deaminase-reductase RibDs (structural homolog of DHFR), and the reductase domain of the RibDs, has revealed that SacH and its homologs are in the new branch and more related to the RibDs (Supporting Information Fig. S13). The enzymatic assays for SacH homologs and FolA (DHFR from E. coli as control, EGC93834.1) indicated that they couldn't reduce DHF to THF as FolA does (Supporting Information Fig. S14), probably owing to the significant differences in substrate binding cavities between SacH and DHFRs (Fig. 4); however, all SacH homologs could reduce THIQ compounds (Supporting Information Figs. S15‒S17), and FolA even showed some catalytic activity towards THIQ family compounds (Supporting Information Fig. S18). It showed how ingenious the microbe is as it uses SacH and its homologs to reduce the hemiaminal pharmacophore and protect itself from DNA alkylation damage while ensuring the concentration of THF in the cell not be affected. Sequence similarity network (SSN) analysis (Supporting Information Fig. S19) indicated that SacH homologs are widely existed in the phylum proteobacteria and actinobacteria, which indicates the extensive presence of reductive detoxification toward hemiaminal pharmacophore. The co-existence of self-resistance genes with biosynthetic genes have been reported in other studies, and the presence of self-resistance gene could guide the discovery of bioactive natural products with specific biological activity21, 22, 23, 24. Given the fact that SacH and its homologs represent a new group of DHFR enzymes possessing self-resistance functions, the mining of sacH homologs may benefit the discovery of new antibiotics with hemiaminal pharmacophore. Conclusions Conclusions In summary, we have deeply characterized the function and enzymology of a resistant protein, SacH, in safracin biosynthesis from Pseudomonas. This DHFR-like protein catalyzes reductive inactivation of the hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing biosynthetic intermediates and THIQ antibiotics for self-resistance. Besides the previously elucidated SDR-mediated pharmacophore reduction, these findings provide another enzyme family for THIQ antibiotic inactivation and enrich our understanding of the DHFR-catalyzed reactions. In summary, we have deeply characterized the function and enzymology of a resistant protein, SacH, in safracin biosynthesis from Pseudomonas. This DHFR-like protein catalyzes reductive inactivation of the hemiaminal pharmacophore-containing biosynthetic intermediates and THIQ antibiotics for self-resistance. Besides the previously elucidated SDR-mediated pharmacophore reduction, these findings provide another enzyme family for THIQ antibiotic inactivation and enrich our understanding of the DHFR-catalyzed reactions. Experimental Experimental Materials Materials Materials Strains and plasmids mentioned in this study were summarized in Supporting Information Table S1, Primers were listed in Supporting Information Table S2. Biochemicals and media were purchased from Sangon Biotech Co., Ltd. (China or Sigma–Aldrich Corporation (USA)). Plasmid Extraction Mini Kit and DNA Gel Extraction Kit were purchased from Tiangen Biotech (Beijing) Co., Ltd. (China). Construction of SacH mutants were preformed using Fast Mutagenesis System from TransGen Biotech. DNA sequencing was performed at GENEWIZ Inc. and Tsingke Biotechnology Co., Ltd. HPLC analysis was performed on Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000. LC‒MS was performed on a Thermo Fisher LTQ Fleet ESIMS spectrometer. HR-ESI-MS analysis was performed on an Agilent 1260 Infinity system with a time-of-light (TOF) mass analyzer. Strains and plasmids mentioned in this study were summarized in Supporting Information Table S1, Primers were listed in Supporting Information Table S2. Biochemicals and media were purchased from Sangon Biotech Co., Ltd. (China or Sigma–Aldrich Corporation (USA)). Plasmid Extraction Mini Kit and DNA Gel Extraction Kit were purchased from Tiangen Biotech (Beijing) Co., Ltd. (China). Construction of SacH mutants were preformed using Fast Mutagenesis System from TransGen Biotech. DNA sequencing was performed at GENEWIZ Inc. and Tsingke Biotechnology Co., Ltd. HPLC analysis was performed on Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000. LC‒MS was performed on a Thermo Fisher LTQ Fleet ESIMS spectrometer. HR-ESI-MS analysis was performed on an Agilent 1260 Infinity system with a time-of-light (TOF) mass analyzer. Strains and plasmids mentioned in this study were summarized in Supporting Information Table S1, Primers were listed in Supporting Information Table S2. Biochemicals and media were purchased from Sangon Biotech Co., Ltd. (China or Sigma–Aldrich Corporation (USA)). Plasmid Extraction Mini Kit and DNA Gel Extraction Kit were purchased from Tiangen Biotech (Beijing) Co., Ltd. (China). Construction of SacH mutants were preformed using Fast Mutagenesis System from TransGen Biotech. DNA sequencing was performed at GENEWIZ Inc. and Tsingke Biotechnology Co., Ltd. HPLC analysis was performed on Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000. LC‒MS was performed on a Thermo Fisher LTQ Fleet ESIMS spectrometer. HR-ESI-MS analysis was performed on an Agilent 1260 Infinity system with a time-of-light (TOF) mass analyzer. Fermentation and isolation of CN-SAC-B and SAC-A Fermentation and isolation of CN-SAC-B and SAC-A Fermentation and isolation of CN-SAC-B and SAC-A Fermentation and isolation of CN-SAC-B and SAC-A were performed using the previously reported method15. See additional detailed methods in Supporting Information. Totally 68 mg of CN-SAC-B was obtained from 5 L broth as yellow amorphous solid. Fermentation and isolation of CN-SAC-B and SAC-A were performed using the previously reported method15. See additional detailed methods in Supporting Information. Totally 68 mg of CN-SAC-B was obtained from 5 L broth as yellow amorphous solid. Fermentation and isolation of CN-SAC-B and SAC-A were performed using the previously reported method15. See additional detailed methods in Supporting Information. Totally 68 mg of CN-SAC-B was obtained from 5 L broth as yellow amorphous solid. Chemical synthesis of SAC-B Chemical synthesis of SAC-B Chemical synthesis of SAC-B Chemical synthesis of SAC-B was performed according to a previously reported method25 using 25 mg of CN-SACB as the reactant. The residue was purified by ODS-A-HG, eluting with MeOH/H2O (containing 0.1‰ TFA) to afford SAC-B (23 mg, 93%). HRMS (ESI-MS) m/z: [M-OH]+ Calcd. for 523.2551; Found: 523.2550. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. Chemical synthesis of SAC-B was performed according to a previously reported method25 using 25 mg of CN-SACB as the reactant. The residue was purified by ODS-A-HG, eluting with MeOH/H2O (containing 0.1‰ TFA) to afford SAC-B (23 mg, 93%). HRMS (ESI-MS) m/z: [M-OH]+ Calcd. for 523.2551; Found: 523.2550. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. Chemical synthesis of SAC-B was performed according to a previously reported method25 using 25 mg of CN-SACB as the reactant. The residue was purified by ODS-A-HG, eluting with MeOH/H2O (containing 0.1‰ TFA) to afford SAC-B (23 mg, 93%). HRMS (ESI-MS) m/z: [M-OH]+ Calcd. for 523.2551; Found: 523.2550. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. Gene expression and protein purification Gene expression and protein purification Gene expression and protein purification The sacH gene was amplified by PCR from genome DNA extracted from P. fluorescens A2-2 using the primers shown in Table S2. The plasmid pTG3044 and pTG3045 containing sacH were constructed from pET28a (NdeI/HindIII) and pET37b (NdeI/XhoI), respectively. The sacH gene was amplified by PCR from genome DNA extracted from P. fluorescens A2-2 using the primers shown in Table S2. The plasmid pTG3044 and pTG3045 containing sacH were constructed from pET28a (NdeI/HindIII) and pET37b (NdeI/XhoI), respectively. The sacH gene was amplified by PCR from genome DNA extracted from P. fluorescens A2-2 using the primers shown in Table S2. The plasmid pTG3044 and pTG3045 containing sacH were constructed from pET28a (NdeI/HindIII) and pET37b (NdeI/XhoI), respectively. Gene of SacH homologs and HmDHFR were synthesized by Tsingke Biotechnology Co., Ltd. after codon optimized, then they were constructed by NdeI/HindIII to pET-28a. Gene of SacH homologs and HmDHFR were synthesized by Tsingke Biotechnology Co., Ltd. after codon optimized, then they were constructed by NdeI/HindIII to pET-28a. Gene of SacH homologs and HmDHFR were synthesized by Tsingke Biotechnology Co., Ltd. after codon optimized, then they were constructed by NdeI/HindIII to pET-28a. The folA gene (accession number: EGC93834.1) was cloned from E. coli BL21 using the primers shown in Table S2. The plasmid pTG3046 containing folA was constructed from pET28a (NdeI/HindIII). The folA gene (accession number: EGC93834.1) was cloned from E. coli BL21 using the primers shown in Table S2. The plasmid pTG3046 containing folA was constructed from pET28a (NdeI/HindIII). The folA gene (accession number: EGC93834.1) was cloned from E. coli BL21 using the primers shown in Table S2. The plasmid pTG3046 containing folA was constructed from pET28a (NdeI/HindIII). Additional detailed methods of protein purification were shown in Supporting Information. Additional detailed methods of protein purification were shown in Supporting Information. Additional detailed methods of protein purification were shown in Supporting Information. Site-directed mutagenesis Site-directed mutagenesis Site-directed mutagenesis PCR amplifications (25 cycles) were carried out using primers shown in Table S2 and using plasmid pTG3045 as template. The experiment procedure was following the direction of Fast Mutagenesis System from TransGen Biotech. PCR amplifications (25 cycles) were carried out using primers shown in Table S2 and using plasmid pTG3045 as template. The experiment procedure was following the direction of Fast Mutagenesis System from TransGen Biotech. PCR amplifications (25 cycles) were carried out using primers shown in Table S2 and using plasmid pTG3045 as template. The experiment procedure was following the direction of Fast Mutagenesis System from TransGen Biotech. Bacterial growth inhibition assays Bacterial growth inhibition assays Bacterial growth inhibition assays The bacterial growth inhibition assays were performed with SAC-B at different concentrations. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. The bacterial growth inhibition assays were performed with SAC-B at different concentrations. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. The bacterial growth inhibition assays were performed with SAC-B at different concentrations. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. Enzymatic assays of SacH, SacH homologs and FolA to DHF Enzymatic assays of SacH, SacH homologs and FolA to DHF Enzymatic assays of SacH, SacH homologs and FolA to DHF DHFR activity was measured by monitoring the decrease of NADPH absorbance at 340 nm. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. DHFR activity was measured by monitoring the decrease of NADPH absorbance at 340 nm. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. DHFR activity was measured by monitoring the decrease of NADPH absorbance at 340 nm. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. Enzymatic assays of SacH, SacH homologs and FolA to SAC-B Enzymatic assays of SacH, SacH homologs and FolA to SAC-B Enzymatic assays of SacH, SacH homologs and FolA to SAC-B The assays were performed in 20 μL reaction solutions containing 0.4 mmol/L SAC-B, 2 mmol/L NADPH and 50 mmol/L sodium citrate/citrate (pH 6.5), 0.015 μmol/L SacH (25 μmol/L for FolA) at 30 °C for 20 min (2 h for FolA). Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. The assays were performed in 20 μL reaction solutions containing 0.4 mmol/L SAC-B, 2 mmol/L NADPH and 50 mmol/L sodium citrate/citrate (pH 6.5), 0.015 μmol/L SacH (25 μmol/L for FolA) at 30 °C for 20 min (2 h for FolA). Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. The assays were performed in 20 μL reaction solutions containing 0.4 mmol/L SAC-B, 2 mmol/L NADPH and 50 mmol/L sodium citrate/citrate (pH 6.5), 0.015 μmol/L SacH (25 μmol/L for FolA) at 30 °C for 20 min (2 h for FolA). Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. Enzymatic assays of SacH, its homologs and FolA to ET-743 Enzymatic assays of SacH, its homologs and FolA to ET-743 Enzymatic assays of SacH, its homologs and FolA to ET-743 The assays were performed in 20 μL reaction solutions containing 0.2 mmol/L ET-743, 2 mmol/L NADPH and 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 10 μmol/L SacH (25 μmol/L for FolA) at 30 °C for 2 h. The secondary mass spectrometry data of ET-743 and ET-745 have been reported in a previous article13. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. The assays were performed in 20 μL reaction solutions containing 0.2 mmol/L ET-743, 2 mmol/L NADPH and 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 10 μmol/L SacH (25 μmol/L for FolA) at 30 °C for 2 h. The secondary mass spectrometry data of ET-743 and ET-745 have been reported in a previous article13. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. The assays were performed in 20 μL reaction solutions containing 0.2 mmol/L ET-743, 2 mmol/L NADPH and 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 10 μmol/L SacH (25 μmol/L for FolA) at 30 °C for 2 h. The secondary mass spectrometry data of ET-743 and ET-745 have been reported in a previous article13. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. Enzymatic assays of SacH, its homologs and FolA to NDM Enzymatic assays of SacH, its homologs and FolA to NDM Enzymatic assays of SacH, its homologs and FolA to NDM The reduction of NDM by enzymes were performed after NDM-401 was oxidized to NDM by NapU. Additional detailed methods of protein expression were shown in Supporting Information. The NMR data of NDM and dH-NDM have been reported in a previous article13. The reduction of NDM by enzymes were performed after NDM-401 was oxidized to NDM by NapU. Additional detailed methods of protein expression were shown in Supporting Information. The NMR data of NDM and dH-NDM have been reported in a previous article13. The reduction of NDM by enzymes were performed after NDM-401 was oxidized to NDM by NapU. Additional detailed methods of protein expression were shown in Supporting Information. The NMR data of NDM and dH-NDM have been reported in a previous article13. Enzymatic assays of SacH to compound 11 Enzymatic assays of SacH to compound 11 Enzymatic assays of SacH to compound 11 The production of compound 11 was performed using the established protocol13. The secondary mass spectrometry data of compound 11 and 12 have been reported in a previous article13. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. The production of compound 11 was performed using the established protocol13. The secondary mass spectrometry data of compound 11 and 12 have been reported in a previous article13. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. The production of compound 11 was performed using the established protocol13. The secondary mass spectrometry data of compound 11 and 12 have been reported in a previous article13. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. Characterization of the optimum pH of SacH Characterization of the optimum pH of SacH Characterization of the optimum pH of SacH The assays were performed the same as the enzymatic assay of SacH to SAC-B, while the reactions were quenched at 10 min, and the pH value changed from 5 to 11, pH 5–6.5: 50 mmol/L citric acid/sodium citrate buffer; pH 7.0–11: 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl buffer. The assays were performed the same as the enzymatic assay of SacH to SAC-B, while the reactions were quenched at 10 min, and the pH value changed from 5 to 11, pH 5–6.5: 50 mmol/L citric acid/sodium citrate buffer; pH 7.0–11: 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl buffer. The assays were performed the same as the enzymatic assay of SacH to SAC-B, while the reactions were quenched at 10 min, and the pH value changed from 5 to 11, pH 5–6.5: 50 mmol/L citric acid/sodium citrate buffer; pH 7.0–11: 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl buffer. Characterization of the optimum temperature of SacH Characterization of the optimum temperature of SacH Characterization of the optimum temperature of SacH The assays were performed the same as the enzymatic assay of SacH to SAC-B, while the reactions were quenched at 3 min, and the temperature changed from 25 to 50 °C. Due to the instability of substrates (SAC-B, ET-743, NDM, and 11) and easier HPLC analysis, the above enzymatic assays with these substrates were not performed at the optimum pH and temperature but at lower temperature 30 °C and pH 8.0. The assays were performed the same as the enzymatic assay of SacH to SAC-B, while the reactions were quenched at 3 min, and the temperature changed from 25 to 50 °C. Due to the instability of substrates (SAC-B, ET-743, NDM, and 11) and easier HPLC analysis, the above enzymatic assays with these substrates were not performed at the optimum pH and temperature but at lower temperature 30 °C and pH 8.0. The assays were performed the same as the enzymatic assay of SacH to SAC-B, while the reactions were quenched at 3 min, and the temperature changed from 25 to 50 °C. Due to the instability of substrates (SAC-B, ET-743, NDM, and 11) and easier HPLC analysis, the above enzymatic assays with these substrates were not performed at the optimum pH and temperature but at lower temperature 30 °C and pH 8.0. Characterization of SacH kinetics Characterization of SacH kinetics Characterization of SacH kinetics Take 30 μL of 25 mmol/L SAC-B in DMSO solution, gradually dilute it with DMSO, take 1 μL of each concentration gradient and add it to the 19 μL reaction mixture containing 2.5 mmol/L NADPH, 50 mmol/L sodium citrate/citrate (pH 6.5). The reactions were initiated by adding 0.015 μmol/L SacH, after 3 min, quenched by the addition of equivalent acetonitrile. Then 20 μL H2O containing NaOH was added to adjust the pH value to 8.0, and the solutions were centrifuged at 12,000×g for 20 min to remove the enzyme and subjected to HPLC analysis. The Origin 8.0 software was used to plot the product generation rate against the substrate concentration, and the Michaelis constant was acquired by non-linear fitting. The experiments were repeated three times. Take 30 μL of 25 mmol/L SAC-B in DMSO solution, gradually dilute it with DMSO, take 1 μL of each concentration gradient and add it to the 19 μL reaction mixture containing 2.5 mmol/L NADPH, 50 mmol/L sodium citrate/citrate (pH 6.5). The reactions were initiated by adding 0.015 μmol/L SacH, after 3 min, quenched by the addition of equivalent acetonitrile. Then 20 μL H2O containing NaOH was added to adjust the pH value to 8.0, and the solutions were centrifuged at 12,000×g for 20 min to remove the enzyme and subjected to HPLC analysis. The Origin 8.0 software was used to plot the product generation rate against the substrate concentration, and the Michaelis constant was acquired by non-linear fitting. The experiments were repeated three times. Take 30 μL of 25 mmol/L SAC-B in DMSO solution, gradually dilute it with DMSO, take 1 μL of each concentration gradient and add it to the 19 μL reaction mixture containing 2.5 mmol/L NADPH, 50 mmol/L sodium citrate/citrate (pH 6.5). The reactions were initiated by adding 0.015 μmol/L SacH, after 3 min, quenched by the addition of equivalent acetonitrile. Then 20 μL H2O containing NaOH was added to adjust the pH value to 8.0, and the solutions were centrifuged at 12,000×g for 20 min to remove the enzyme and subjected to HPLC analysis. The Origin 8.0 software was used to plot the product generation rate against the substrate concentration, and the Michaelis constant was acquired by non-linear fitting. The experiments were repeated three times. Crystallization, X-ray diffraction data collection, and structural elucidation Crystallization, X-ray diffraction data collection, and structural elucidation Crystallization, X-ray diffraction data collection, and structural elucidation SacH was purified using Ni-NTA affinity chromatography and crystallization screening was performed with a robot (Mosquito LCP, LBD Life sciences TTP, China). High-quality crystals were obtained in 28% (w/v) PEG 1500, 100 mmol/L PCB buffer pH 7.0 at 16 °C after 5 days. SacH−NADPH−SAC-A complex crystals were obtained by incubating the protein with a 5-fold molar of SAC-A on ice for 2 h before crystallization. The X-ray diffraction data were collected with an XtaLAB Synergy diffractometer system (1.54056 Å). The data were processed and scaled using CrysAlisPro software. Molecular replacement was performed with Phaser using a putative reductase MS0308 structure (PDB ID: 2XW7) from M. smegmatis as the searching model. Standard procedures were performed to obtain the final model. Relevant statistics are summarized in Supporting Information Table S3. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. SacH was purified using Ni-NTA affinity chromatography and crystallization screening was performed with a robot (Mosquito LCP, LBD Life sciences TTP, China). High-quality crystals were obtained in 28% (w/v) PEG 1500, 100 mmol/L PCB buffer pH 7.0 at 16 °C after 5 days. SacH−NADPH−SAC-A complex crystals were obtained by incubating the protein with a 5-fold molar of SAC-A on ice for 2 h before crystallization. The X-ray diffraction data were collected with an XtaLAB Synergy diffractometer system (1.54056 Å). The data were processed and scaled using CrysAlisPro software. Molecular replacement was performed with Phaser using a putative reductase MS0308 structure (PDB ID: 2XW7) from M. smegmatis as the searching model. Standard procedures were performed to obtain the final model. Relevant statistics are summarized in Supporting Information Table S3. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. SacH was purified using Ni-NTA affinity chromatography and crystallization screening was performed with a robot (Mosquito LCP, LBD Life sciences TTP, China). High-quality crystals were obtained in 28% (w/v) PEG 1500, 100 mmol/L PCB buffer pH 7.0 at 16 °C after 5 days. SacH−NADPH−SAC-A complex crystals were obtained by incubating the protein with a 5-fold molar of SAC-A on ice for 2 h before crystallization. The X-ray diffraction data were collected with an XtaLAB Synergy diffractometer system (1.54056 Å). The data were processed and scaled using CrysAlisPro software. Molecular replacement was performed with Phaser using a putative reductase MS0308 structure (PDB ID: 2XW7) from M. smegmatis as the searching model. Standard procedures were performed to obtain the final model. Relevant statistics are summarized in Supporting Information Table S3. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. Substrate modelling Substrate modelling Substrate modelling Substrate modelling was performed using AutoDock Vina. SacH−NADPH−SAC-A complex structure without SAC-A was used as the macromolecule. Iminium ion intermediates of SAC-B, 11, Et-743 and NDM were used as the ligands. A grid box was defined and Auto dock was run with default parameters. The docking results were visualized and analyzed using PyMol. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. Substrate modelling was performed using AutoDock Vina. SacH−NADPH−SAC-A complex structure without SAC-A was used as the macromolecule. Iminium ion intermediates of SAC-B, 11, Et-743 and NDM were used as the ligands. A grid box was defined and Auto dock was run with default parameters. The docking results were visualized and analyzed using PyMol. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. Substrate modelling was performed using AutoDock Vina. SacH−NADPH−SAC-A complex structure without SAC-A was used as the macromolecule. Iminium ion intermediates of SAC-B, 11, Et-743 and NDM were used as the ligands. A grid box was defined and Auto dock was run with default parameters. The docking results were visualized and analyzed using PyMol. Additional detailed methods were shown in Supporting Information. The sequence similarity network (SSN) analysis of SacH homologs The sequence similarity network (SSN) analysis of SacH homologs The sequence similarity network (SSN) analysis of SacH homologs Top 1000 SacH homologs were downloaded by blastP from non-redundant protein sequences database. Along with two SacH homologs from PDB database, they were subjected to SSN analysis using the online Enzyme Function Initiative-Enzyme Similarity Tool. Cytoscape was used to view the SSN with an alignment score threshold of 70. SacH and its homologs were marked. Top 1000 SacH homologs were downloaded by blastP from non-redundant protein sequences database. Along with two SacH homologs from PDB database, they were subjected to SSN analysis using the online Enzyme Function Initiative-Enzyme Similarity Tool. Cytoscape was used to view the SSN with an alignment score threshold of 70. SacH and its homologs were marked. Top 1000 SacH homologs were downloaded by blastP from non-redundant protein sequences database. Along with two SacH homologs from PDB database, they were subjected to SSN analysis using the online Enzyme Function Initiative-Enzyme Similarity Tool. Cytoscape was used to view the SSN with an alignment score threshold of 70. SacH and its homologs were marked. Acknowledgments Acknowledgments This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 31930002, 21621002, 21877002, 81991525, 82273829 and 22077007), the key project at central government level: the ability establishment of sustainable use for valuable Chinese medicine resources (2060302-2201-17). The authors would like to thank Prof. Dawei Ma (Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China) for kindly providing the synthesized ET-743. The authors would like to thank Fuling Yin and Hongli Jia (State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China) for X-ray diffraction test. The authors would like to thank the staff of beamlines BL17U1 and BL19U1 of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility for access and help with the X-ray data collection. This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 31930002, 21621002, 21877002, 81991525, 82273829 and 22077007), the key project at central government level: the ability establishment of sustainable use for valuable Chinese medicine resources (2060302-2201-17). The authors would like to thank Prof. Dawei Ma (Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China) for kindly providing the synthesized ET-743. The authors would like to thank Fuling Yin and Hongli Jia (State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China) for X-ray diffraction test. The authors would like to thank the staff of beamlines BL17U1 and BL19U1 of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility for access and help with the X-ray data collection. Author contributions Author contributions Gong-Li Tang, Ming Ma, Ning Shao, and Xueyang Ma designed the experiments and analyzed the results. Ning Shao performed most of the biochemical assays. Xeuyang Ma solved the complex crystal structure. Ying-Ying Zhang performed some biochemical assays. Donghui Yang helped the solution of complex crystal structure. Gong-Li Tang, Ming Ma, Ning Shao, and Xueyang Ma designed the experiments and analyzed the results. Ning Shao performed most of the biochemical assays. Xeuyang Ma solved the complex crystal structure. Ying-Ying Zhang performed some biochemical assays. Donghui Yang helped the solution of complex crystal structure. Conflicts of interest Conflicts of interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. References Supplementary data Supplementary data The following is the Supplementary data to this article:Multimedia component 1Multimedia component 1 The following is the Supplementary data to this article:Multimedia component 1Multimedia component 1 Multimedia component 1 Multimedia component 1 Peer review under the responsibility of Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. Supporting data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2022.10.005.