The study aimed to reveal the structure and function of phageome existing in soil rhizobiome of Abutilon fruticosum in order to detect accidentally-packaged bacterial genes that encode Carbohydrate-Active enZymes (or CAZymes) and those that confer antibiotic resistance (e.g., antibiotic resistance genes or ARGs). Highly abundant genes were shown to mainly exist in members of the genera Pseudomonas, Streptomyces, Mycobacterium and Rhodococcus. Enriched CAZymes belong to glycoside hydrolase families GH4, GH6, GH12, GH15 and GH43 and mainly function in D-glucose biosynthesis via 10 biochemical passages. Another enriched CAZyme, e.g., alpha-galactosidase, of the GH4 family is responsible for the wealth of different carbohydrate forms in rhizospheric soil sink of A. fruticosum. ARGs of this phageome include the soxR and OleC genes that participate in the “antibiotic efflux pump” resistance mechanism, the parY mutant gene that participates in the “antibiotic target alteration” mechanism and the arr-1, iri, and AAC(3)-Ic genes that participate in the “antibiotic inactivation” mechanism. It is claimed that the genera Streptomyces, which harbors phages with oleC and parY mutant genes, and Pseudomonas, which harbors phages with soxR and AAC(3)-Ic genes, are approaching multidrug resistance via newly disseminating phages. These ARGs inhibit many antibiotics including oleandomycin, tetracycline, rifampin and aminoglycoside. The study highlights the possibility of accidental packaging of these ARGs in soil phageome and the risk of their horizontal transfer to human gut pathogens through the food chain as detrimental impacts of soil phageome of A. fruticosum. The study also emphasizes the beneficial impacts of phageome on soil microbiome and plant interacting in storing carbohydrates in the soil sink for use by the two entities upon carbohydrate deprivation. Keywords Introduction Introduction Abutilon fruticosum is a wild plant species that is indigenous to southwestern and western Asia (Fryxell, 2002, Alzahrani, 2021) and has several medicinal and economic values (Patel and Rajput, 2013). Chemical analysis of plant leaf indicates that it contains useful steroids, carbohydrates and flavonoids (Suryawanshi and Umate, 2020). Plant root can contain linoleic acid, oleic acid, and palmitic acid, while seeds can contain essential amino acids (Suryawanshi and Umate, 2020). In terms of its pharmaceutical properties, leaf extract of A. fruticosum showed antimicrobial activities against respiratory tract infections with several microbes including Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Streptococcus epidermidis and Candida tropicalis (Gouda et al., 2022). This plant is not toxic, therefore, it is used to treat body pain (Khadabadi and Bhajipale, 2010, Suryawanshi and Umate, 2020). Medical applications also include treatment of ulcers, piles, inflammation of human bladder (Patel and Rajput, 2013). Abutilon fruticosum is a wild plant species that is indigenous to southwestern and western Asia (Fryxell, 2002, Alzahrani, 2021) and has several medicinal and economic values (Patel and Rajput, 2013). Chemical analysis of plant leaf indicates that it contains useful steroids, carbohydrates and flavonoids (Suryawanshi and Umate, 2020). Plant root can contain linoleic acid, oleic acid, and palmitic acid, while seeds can contain essential amino acids (Suryawanshi and Umate, 2020). In terms of its pharmaceutical properties, leaf extract of A. fruticosum showed antimicrobial activities against respiratory tract infections with several microbes including Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Streptococcus epidermidis and Candida tropicalis (Gouda et al., 2022). This plant is not toxic, therefore, it is used to treat body pain (Khadabadi and Bhajipale, 2010, Suryawanshi and Umate, 2020). Medical applications also include treatment of ulcers, piles, inflammation of human bladder (Patel and Rajput, 2013). Metagenomic whole shotgun sequencing (mWGS) coupled with gene cataloging allow the accurate detection of plant rhizospheric microbiomes at the structural and functional levels (Vorholt et al., 2017). The active hotspot stage of plant–microbe interactions that lead to synergism and/or disease is the rhizosphere. Through a variety of KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes) pathways, these interactions may lead to highly enriched enzymes and proteins that are advantageous to both parties. Additionally, interactions lead to the potential identification of novel antibiotics and the spread of these genes in the open environment (Blau et al., 2019). Metagenomic whole shotgun sequencing (mWGS) approach allows the study of, not only the archaeome and bacteriome of a given metagenome, but also its fungome and virome (or phageome) (Vorholt et al., 2017, Odelade and Babalola, 2019). The latter two genomes provide important insights into shaping microbiome signatures, biodiversity, function and interaction with intact plant (Segata et al., 2011). Metagenomic whole shotgun sequencing (mWGS) coupled with gene cataloging allow the accurate detection of plant rhizospheric microbiomes at the structural and functional levels (Vorholt et al., 2017). The active hotspot stage of plant–microbe interactions that lead to synergism and/or disease is the rhizosphere. Through a variety of KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes) pathways, these interactions may lead to highly enriched enzymes and proteins that are advantageous to both parties. Additionally, interactions lead to the potential identification of novel antibiotics and the spread of these genes in the open environment (Blau et al., 2019). Metagenomic whole shotgun sequencing (mWGS) approach allows the study of, not only the archaeome and bacteriome of a given metagenome, but also its fungome and virome (or phageome) (Vorholt et al., 2017, Odelade and Babalola, 2019). The latter two genomes provide important insights into shaping microbiome signatures, biodiversity, function and interaction with intact plant (Segata et al., 2011). The pattern of plant root exudates, which encourages the necessary metabolic processes of the surrounding microbiome, affects the microbiome signature in the plant rhizospheric zone (Pett-Ridge et al., 2021). Rhizosbiome is rich in genes encoding Carbohydrate-Active enZymes (or CAZymes) that can function in carbohydrate catalysis and metabolism (Lombard et al., 2014, Levy et al., 2018). Some of these CAZymes could approach the double displacement mechanism to produce simpler and more complex carbohydrates (Nin-Hill et al., 2023). CAZymes are mainly placed in five CAZy classes (level 1). Each class has a number of CAZy families (level 2) with CAZymes (level 3) receiving classification codes (level EC) in certain pathways. The pattern of plant root exudates, which encourages the necessary metabolic processes of the surrounding microbiome, affects the microbiome signature in the plant rhizospheric zone (Pett-Ridge et al., 2021). Rhizosbiome is rich in genes encoding Carbohydrate-Active enZymes (or CAZymes) that can function in carbohydrate catalysis and metabolism (Lombard et al., 2014, Levy et al., 2018). Some of these CAZymes could approach the double displacement mechanism to produce simpler and more complex carbohydrates (Nin-Hill et al., 2023). CAZymes are mainly placed in five CAZy classes (level 1). Each class has a number of CAZy families (level 2) with CAZymes (level 3) receiving classification codes (level EC) in certain pathways. The discovery of new antibiotics is a main target of pharmaceutical companies because clinical pathogenic or opportunistic bacteria commonly generate resistance against the currently used antibiotics via gene mutations, or via the transformation with new ARGs horizontally transferred from one to the other genetically-related bacteria (Bäckhed et al., 2015, Dutescu and Hillier, 2021). Rhizospheric antibiotic resistance genes can spread via mobile genetic elements, e.g., plasmid, phage, etc., through a process known as horizontal gene transfer (HGT) to clinical human isolates possibly through food chain. Virome, particularly phageome, is a major candidate for such an incidence of HGT if it is accidentally packaged with bacterial genes, a process that is sometimes referred to as lateral transduction (Hassan et al., 2021, Pfeifer et al., 2022). Unfortunately, there is no enough attention paid to horizontal transfer of new versatile ARGs of wild plant species to human gut or skin microbiome (Chen et al., 2019, Obermeier et al., 2021) although several recent reports of gene cataloging have raised such a risk (Shami et al., 2022, Ashy et al., 2023). The discovery of new antibiotics is a main target of pharmaceutical companies because clinical pathogenic or opportunistic bacteria commonly generate resistance against the currently used antibiotics via gene mutations, or via the transformation with new ARGs horizontally transferred from one to the other genetically-related bacteria (Bäckhed et al., 2015, Dutescu and Hillier, 2021). Rhizospheric antibiotic resistance genes can spread via mobile genetic elements, e.g., plasmid, phage, etc., through a process known as horizontal gene transfer (HGT) to clinical human isolates possibly through food chain. Virome, particularly phageome, is a major candidate for such an incidence of HGT if it is accidentally packaged with bacterial genes, a process that is sometimes referred to as lateral transduction (Hassan et al., 2021, Pfeifer et al., 2022). Unfortunately, there is no enough attention paid to horizontal transfer of new versatile ARGs of wild plant species to human gut or skin microbiome (Chen et al., 2019, Obermeier et al., 2021) although several recent reports of gene cataloging have raised such a risk (Shami et al., 2022, Ashy et al., 2023). In the current work, we have investigated abundant ARGs and other genes encoding important CAZymes accidentally-packaged in rhizobiome of the native wild plant Abutilon fruticosum. The risk of ARGs existing in CARD (Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database) for their prevalence in human pathogenic/colonizer bacteria was also investigated. In the current work, we have investigated abundant ARGs and other genes encoding important CAZymes accidentally-packaged in rhizobiome of the native wild plant Abutilon fruticosum. The risk of ARGs existing in CARD (Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database) for their prevalence in human pathogenic/colonizer bacteria was also investigated. Materials and methods Materials and methods Collection of soil samples, DNA extraction and deep sequencing Collection of soil samples, DNA extraction and deep sequencing Collection of soil samples, DNA extraction and deep sequencing Samples of the soil microbiome of A. fruticosum were collected at coordinates 21°12′17.8″N 39°31′26.4″E near Jeddah, Saudi Arabia close to the Red Sea (Al-Eisawi and Al-Ruzayza, 2015). Before the sample collection, more than three months had passed without rain in this location. Lateral roots were severed between 10 and 30 cm deep in order to harvest microbiome from the rhizosphere. Then, soil that did not physically attach to the root and was located less than 1 cm away from the root was gathered. Bulk soil samples, however, were collected ≥ 10 m away from A. fruticosum growing plants. As soon as soil samples were taken to the lab, they were immediately placed in liquid nitrogen and kept there until genome extraction (Hurt et al., 2001). Different samples' DNAs were extracted, and 30 μL/sample (10 ng/μL) of each were sent to Novogene for mWGS on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. Samples of the soil microbiome of A. fruticosum were collected at coordinates 21°12′17.8″N 39°31′26.4″E near Jeddah, Saudi Arabia close to the Red Sea (Al-Eisawi and Al-Ruzayza, 2015). Before the sample collection, more than three months had passed without rain in this location. Lateral roots were severed between 10 and 30 cm deep in order to harvest microbiome from the rhizosphere. Then, soil that did not physically attach to the root and was located less than 1 cm away from the root was gathered. Bulk soil samples, however, were collected ≥ 10 m away from A. fruticosum growing plants. As soon as soil samples were taken to the lab, they were immediately placed in liquid nitrogen and kept there until genome extraction (Hurt et al., 2001). Different samples' DNAs were extracted, and 30 μL/sample (10 ng/μL) of each were sent to Novogene for mWGS on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. Samples of the soil microbiome of A. fruticosum were collected at coordinates 21°12′17.8″N 39°31′26.4″E near Jeddah, Saudi Arabia close to the Red Sea (Al-Eisawi and Al-Ruzayza, 2015). Before the sample collection, more than three months had passed without rain in this location. Lateral roots were severed between 10 and 30 cm deep in order to harvest microbiome from the rhizosphere. Then, soil that did not physically attach to the root and was located less than 1 cm away from the root was gathered. Bulk soil samples, however, were collected ≥ 10 m away from A. fruticosum growing plants. As soon as soil samples were taken to the lab, they were immediately placed in liquid nitrogen and kept there until genome extraction (Hurt et al., 2001). Different samples' DNAs were extracted, and 30 μL/sample (10 ng/μL) of each were sent to Novogene for mWGS on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. Bioinformatics analysis Bioinformatics analysis Bioinformatics analysis The NEBNext® UltraTM DNA Library Prep kit was used to create the genomic library, and the raw sequencing data was submitted to the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) and assigned the accession number ERS15580318-23. Datasets were processed as previously described, including assembly, quality checking, adaptor ligation, U excision, and DNA clean-up (Karlsson et al., 2012, Mende et al., 2012, Oh et al., 2014). Clean datasets recovered with high abundant reads were assembled and abundance was detected from individual microbiome samples. In order to retrieve chimeric NOVO_MIX scaffolds and scaftigs, least abundant clean reads of the six microbomes were collected, mixed, and reassembled as previously described (Nielsen et al., 2014). Then, the abundance of these scaftigs was detected in the individual microbiome samples. Pooled reads of the two assembly categories were mapped against Soap 2.21, and then function was detected via MetaGeneMark (Nielsen et al., 2014). Greedy pairwise comparison was used to detect non- redundant gene query catalogues (nrGC), then, gene annotation and functional analysis were carried out by MEGAN and Diamond (Huson et al., 2007, Li et al., 2014, Buchfink et al., 2015). The NEBNext® UltraTM DNA Library Prep kit was used to create the genomic library, and the raw sequencing data was submitted to the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) and assigned the accession number ERS15580318-23. Datasets were processed as previously described, including assembly, quality checking, adaptor ligation, U excision, and DNA clean-up (Karlsson et al., 2012, Mende et al., 2012, Oh et al., 2014). Clean datasets recovered with high abundant reads were assembled and abundance was detected from individual microbiome samples. In order to retrieve chimeric NOVO_MIX scaffolds and scaftigs, least abundant clean reads of the six microbomes were collected, mixed, and reassembled as previously described (Nielsen et al., 2014). Then, the abundance of these scaftigs was detected in the individual microbiome samples. Pooled reads of the two assembly categories were mapped against Soap 2.21, and then function was detected via MetaGeneMark (Nielsen et al., 2014). Greedy pairwise comparison was used to detect non- redundant gene query catalogues (nrGC), then, gene annotation and functional analysis were carried out by MEGAN and Diamond (Huson et al., 2007, Li et al., 2014, Buchfink et al., 2015). The NEBNext® UltraTM DNA Library Prep kit was used to create the genomic library, and the raw sequencing data was submitted to the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) and assigned the accession number ERS15580318-23. Datasets were processed as previously described, including assembly, quality checking, adaptor ligation, U excision, and DNA clean-up (Karlsson et al., 2012, Mende et al., 2012, Oh et al., 2014). Clean datasets recovered with high abundant reads were assembled and abundance was detected from individual microbiome samples. In order to retrieve chimeric NOVO_MIX scaffolds and scaftigs, least abundant clean reads of the six microbomes were collected, mixed, and reassembled as previously described (Nielsen et al., 2014). Then, the abundance of these scaftigs was detected in the individual microbiome samples. Pooled reads of the two assembly categories were mapped against Soap 2.21, and then function was detected via MetaGeneMark (Nielsen et al., 2014). Greedy pairwise comparison was used to detect non- redundant gene query catalogues (nrGC), then, gene annotation and functional analysis were carried out by MEGAN and Diamond (Huson et al., 2007, Li et al., 2014, Buchfink et al., 2015). The openly accessible CAZy database (version 2014.11.25) was used to map predicted amino acid sequences (Lombard et al., 2014). The generated CAZymes were then classified into classes and families and mapped against the KEGG pathways for functional annotation (Li et al., 2014). Assembled readings were also mapped to Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD) with an e value of ≤1e-5 in order to recover ARG queries and their analog subject IDs (Yang et al., 2013, Forsberg et al., 2014, Martínez et al., 2015). Identified ARGs that have abundance of 15 or more were searched for their antimicrobial resistance (AMR) families as well as mechanisms of resistance as described previously (Liu and Pop, 2009). Phageome data was then extracted from those of the resulted virome after we searched the CARD for bacterial hosts that showed high abundance in the rhizospheric soil microbiome of A. fruticosum. Then, phageome with accidental packaging of highly abundant ARGs was then searched for the prevalence or spread of pathogenic/colonizer bacteria in human or, otherwise, for the possibility of horizontal transfer into genetically-related human clinical isolates. The openly accessible CAZy database (version 2014.11.25) was used to map predicted amino acid sequences (Lombard et al., 2014). The generated CAZymes were then classified into classes and families and mapped against the KEGG pathways for functional annotation (Li et al., 2014). Assembled readings were also mapped to Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD) with an e value of ≤1e-5 in order to recover ARG queries and their analog subject IDs (Yang et al., 2013, Forsberg et al., 2014, Martínez et al., 2015). Identified ARGs that have abundance of 15 or more were searched for their antimicrobial resistance (AMR) families as well as mechanisms of resistance as described previously (Liu and Pop, 2009). Phageome data was then extracted from those of the resulted virome after we searched the CARD for bacterial hosts that showed high abundance in the rhizospheric soil microbiome of A. fruticosum. Then, phageome with accidental packaging of highly abundant ARGs was then searched for the prevalence or spread of pathogenic/colonizer bacteria in human or, otherwise, for the possibility of horizontal transfer into genetically-related human clinical isolates. The openly accessible CAZy database (version 2014.11.25) was used to map predicted amino acid sequences (Lombard et al., 2014). The generated CAZymes were then classified into classes and families and mapped against the KEGG pathways for functional annotation (Li et al., 2014). Assembled readings were also mapped to Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD) with an e value of ≤1e-5 in order to recover ARG queries and their analog subject IDs (Yang et al., 2013, Forsberg et al., 2014, Martínez et al., 2015). Identified ARGs that have abundance of 15 or more were searched for their antimicrobial resistance (AMR) families as well as mechanisms of resistance as described previously (Liu and Pop, 2009). Phageome data was then extracted from those of the resulted virome after we searched the CARD for bacterial hosts that showed high abundance in the rhizospheric soil microbiome of A. fruticosum. Then, phageome with accidental packaging of highly abundant ARGs was then searched for the prevalence or spread of pathogenic/colonizer bacteria in human or, otherwise, for the possibility of horizontal transfer into genetically-related human clinical isolates. Results Results Abundances of rhizobiome of A. fruticosum along with the surrounding bulk soil microbiomes are shown in Table S1 of which, a number of 45 viral taxa were shown to exist. Among this virome, a number of 23 phages are relatively highly abundant (Table S2). Abundance of phageome was shown to be higher in microbiome of the rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum than in the microbiome of bulk soil (Fig. 1 and Table S2). Soil bacteriophages belong to nine bacterial genera namely Arthrobacter (103 bacterial species with one phage), Klebsiella (four bacterial species with one phage), Pseudomonas (118 bacterial species with one phage), Mycobacterium (258 bacterial species with nine phages), Streptomyces (570 bacterial species with six phages), Caulobacter (27 bacterial species with one phage), Gordonia (34 bacterial species with two phages), Ochrobactrum (12 bacterial species with one phage), and Rhodococcus (74 bacterial species with one phage) (Fig. 1 and Tables S1 & S2). Abundance average and total abundance of these bacteria in the microbiomes of A. fruticosum were estimated. These bacteria are more abundant in the rhizosphere (R) than in the bulk soil (S) (Fig. 2 and Table S1).Fig. 1Abundance of phage non-redundant gene queries in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S2.Fig. 2Abundance average and total abundance of non-redundant gene queries of bacterial genera harboring phages (shown in Fig. 1) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S1. Abundances of rhizobiome of A. fruticosum along with the surrounding bulk soil microbiomes are shown in Table S1 of which, a number of 45 viral taxa were shown to exist. Among this virome, a number of 23 phages are relatively highly abundant (Table S2). Abundance of phageome was shown to be higher in microbiome of the rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum than in the microbiome of bulk soil (Fig. 1 and Table S2). Soil bacteriophages belong to nine bacterial genera namely Arthrobacter (103 bacterial species with one phage), Klebsiella (four bacterial species with one phage), Pseudomonas (118 bacterial species with one phage), Mycobacterium (258 bacterial species with nine phages), Streptomyces (570 bacterial species with six phages), Caulobacter (27 bacterial species with one phage), Gordonia (34 bacterial species with two phages), Ochrobactrum (12 bacterial species with one phage), and Rhodococcus (74 bacterial species with one phage) (Fig. 1 and Tables S1 & S2). Abundance average and total abundance of these bacteria in the microbiomes of A. fruticosum were estimated. These bacteria are more abundant in the rhizosphere (R) than in the bulk soil (S) (Fig. 2 and Table S1).Fig. 1Abundance of phage non-redundant gene queries in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S2.Fig. 2Abundance average and total abundance of non-redundant gene queries of bacterial genera harboring phages (shown in Fig. 1) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S1. Fig. 1Abundance of phage non-redundant gene queries in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S2. Fig. 1Abundance of phage non-redundant gene queries in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S2. Abundance of phage non-redundant gene queries in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S2. Abundance of phage non-redundant gene queries in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S2. Fig. 2Abundance average and total abundance of non-redundant gene queries of bacterial genera harboring phages (shown in Fig. 1) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S1. Fig. 2Abundance average and total abundance of non-redundant gene queries of bacterial genera harboring phages (shown in Fig. 1) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S1. Abundance average and total abundance of non-redundant gene queries of bacterial genera harboring phages (shown in Fig. 1) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S1. Abundance average and total abundance of non-redundant gene queries of bacterial genera harboring phages (shown in Fig. 1) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S1. The total number of gene queries in soil microbiomes of the wild A. fruticosum is >53,000 across different CAZy families and their CAZymes and across the two soil types (Table S3). Of which, phageome of A. fruticosum soil showed accidental packaging of genes encoding 19 CAZymes of five CAZy families, namely GH4 (six CAZymes), GH6 (two CAZymes), GH12 (four CAZymes), GH15 (three CAZymes) and GH43 (five CAZymes). Note that CAZyme endoglucanase exists in families GH4 and GH6 (Table S4). These 19 CAZy families belong to CAZy class glycoside hydrolases (GHs) that mainly manipulate glycosidic bonds of carbohydrates (Lombard et al., 2014). Numbers of gene queries of the different CAZy families across the two soil types are shown in Table S5, while those for phageome of Abutilon fruticosum are shown in Table S6 and described in Fig. 3. The results indicated that CAZy families GH15 and GH43 harbor the largest number of gene queries. Query abundance of genes encoding the different CAZy families is shown in Table S7. In terms of abundance of the five phageome GH families in the two soil types, the results indicated higher abundance in rhizospheric soil than that in bulk soil (Fig. 4 and Table S8). Numbers of gene queries of the different CAZymes across the two soil types are shown in Table S9, while those (19) for phageome of Abutilon fruticosum are described in Table S10 and Fig. 5. The results indicated that CAZymes alpha-glucosidase, glucodextranase and alpha-L-arabinofuranosidase harbor the largest number of gene queries across the two soil types. Abundance results of genes encoding CAZymes of different CAZy families are shown in Table S11. In terms of abundance of the 19 CAZymes, higher abundance was detected in the rhizospheric soil microbiome than that in bulk soil microbiome (Fig. 6 and Table S12). Among these 19 CAZymes, twelve exist in four pathways namely “Starch and sucrose metabolism” (map00500, eight CAZymes) (Fig. S1 and Table S12), “Galactose metabolism” (map00052, two CAZyme) (Fig. S2 and Table S12), “Pentose and glucuronate interconversions” (map00040, one CAZyme) (Fig. S3 and Table S12) and “Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism” (map00520, two CAZymes) (Fig. S4 and Table S12). Note that CAZyme alpha-glucosidase participates in the two pathways “Starch and sucrose metabolism” (map00500) and “Galactose metabolism” (map00052).Fig. 3Query number of phage genes encoding CAZy families of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S6.Fig. 4Abundance of genes encoding CAZy families of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S8.Fig. 5Query number of phage genes encoding CAZymes of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S10.Fig. 6Abundance of phage genes encoding CAZymes of class GH along with their available KEGG pathways in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S12. The total number of gene queries in soil microbiomes of the wild A. fruticosum is >53,000 across different CAZy families and their CAZymes and across the two soil types (Table S3). Of which, phageome of A. fruticosum soil showed accidental packaging of genes encoding 19 CAZymes of five CAZy families, namely GH4 (six CAZymes), GH6 (two CAZymes), GH12 (four CAZymes), GH15 (three CAZymes) and GH43 (five CAZymes). Note that CAZyme endoglucanase exists in families GH4 and GH6 (Table S4). These 19 CAZy families belong to CAZy class glycoside hydrolases (GHs) that mainly manipulate glycosidic bonds of carbohydrates (Lombard et al., 2014). Numbers of gene queries of the different CAZy families across the two soil types are shown in Table S5, while those for phageome of Abutilon fruticosum are shown in Table S6 and described in Fig. 3. The results indicated that CAZy families GH15 and GH43 harbor the largest number of gene queries. Query abundance of genes encoding the different CAZy families is shown in Table S7. In terms of abundance of the five phageome GH families in the two soil types, the results indicated higher abundance in rhizospheric soil than that in bulk soil (Fig. 4 and Table S8). Numbers of gene queries of the different CAZymes across the two soil types are shown in Table S9, while those (19) for phageome of Abutilon fruticosum are described in Table S10 and Fig. 5. The results indicated that CAZymes alpha-glucosidase, glucodextranase and alpha-L-arabinofuranosidase harbor the largest number of gene queries across the two soil types. Abundance results of genes encoding CAZymes of different CAZy families are shown in Table S11. In terms of abundance of the 19 CAZymes, higher abundance was detected in the rhizospheric soil microbiome than that in bulk soil microbiome (Fig. 6 and Table S12). Among these 19 CAZymes, twelve exist in four pathways namely “Starch and sucrose metabolism” (map00500, eight CAZymes) (Fig. S1 and Table S12), “Galactose metabolism” (map00052, two CAZyme) (Fig. S2 and Table S12), “Pentose and glucuronate interconversions” (map00040, one CAZyme) (Fig. S3 and Table S12) and “Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism” (map00520, two CAZymes) (Fig. S4 and Table S12). Note that CAZyme alpha-glucosidase participates in the two pathways “Starch and sucrose metabolism” (map00500) and “Galactose metabolism” (map00052).Fig. 3Query number of phage genes encoding CAZy families of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S6.Fig. 4Abundance of genes encoding CAZy families of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S8.Fig. 5Query number of phage genes encoding CAZymes of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S10.Fig. 6Abundance of phage genes encoding CAZymes of class GH along with their available KEGG pathways in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S12. Fig. 3Query number of phage genes encoding CAZy families of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S6. Fig. 3Query number of phage genes encoding CAZy families of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S6. Query number of phage genes encoding CAZy families of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S6. Query number of phage genes encoding CAZy families of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S6. Fig. 4Abundance of genes encoding CAZy families of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S8. Fig. 4Abundance of genes encoding CAZy families of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S8. Abundance of genes encoding CAZy families of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S8. Abundance of genes encoding CAZy families of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S8. Fig. 5Query number of phage genes encoding CAZymes of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S10. Fig. 5Query number of phage genes encoding CAZymes of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S10. Query number of phage genes encoding CAZymes of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S10. Query number of phage genes encoding CAZymes of class GH in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S10. Fig. 6Abundance of phage genes encoding CAZymes of class GH along with their available KEGG pathways in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S12. Fig. 6Abundance of phage genes encoding CAZymes of class GH along with their available KEGG pathways in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S12. Abundance of phage genes encoding CAZymes of class GH along with their available KEGG pathways in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S12. Abundance of phage genes encoding CAZymes of class GH along with their available KEGG pathways in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S12. Total number of non-redundant genes encoding ARGs gene queries across microbiomes of the two soil types is 1,296 (Table S13). Seventeen ARGs showed query number of ≥15 (Table S14). Of which, oleC and soxR showed the highest records. These 17 ARGs were searched for hosting bacteria, of which 11 of them have no specific bacterial host in the soil microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum, thus, were not studied further. Therefore, the studied accidentally-packaged phage ARGs included oleC, soxR, parY mutant, arr-1, iri and ACC(3)-Ic (Fig. 7 and Table S15). At the genus level, oleC and parY mutant gene are prevalent in human pathogens of Streptomyces, while Pseudomonas for soxR and AAC(3)-Ic genes, Mycobacterium for arr-1 gene, and Rhodococcus for iri gene (Table S18). Phages transducing these four bacterial genera are shown in Table S2. Complete list of bacterial pathogens at the species level with prevalent ARGs is available in CARD (https://card.mcmaster.ca/prevalence). Query abundance of genes encoding ARGs of soil microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum is shown in Table S16, while that for the selected six phage ARGs is described in Fig. 8 and Table S17. In comparison to bulk soil, rhizospheric soil had larger concentrations of these ARGs (Fig. 8) and their associated bacterial hosts (Fig. 1). Table S18 provides a description of these six ARGs in CARD, including information about their antimicrobial resistance (AMR) gene families, drug classes, and resistance mechanisms. The ARGs oleC and soxR belong to the “antibiotic efflux pump“ resistance mechanism, while the ARG parY mutant belongs to the “antibiotic target alteration” resistance mechanism, and the ARGs arr-1, iri, and ACC(3)-Ic belong to the “antibiotic inactivation“ resistance mechanism.Fig. 7Query number referring to the most abundant (≥15) non-redundant phage antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S14.Fig. 8Abundance of gene queries referring to the most abundant (≥15) non-redundant phage antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S16. Total number of non-redundant genes encoding ARGs gene queries across microbiomes of the two soil types is 1,296 (Table S13). Seventeen ARGs showed query number of ≥15 (Table S14). Of which, oleC and soxR showed the highest records. These 17 ARGs were searched for hosting bacteria, of which 11 of them have no specific bacterial host in the soil microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum, thus, were not studied further. Therefore, the studied accidentally-packaged phage ARGs included oleC, soxR, parY mutant, arr-1, iri and ACC(3)-Ic (Fig. 7 and Table S15). At the genus level, oleC and parY mutant gene are prevalent in human pathogens of Streptomyces, while Pseudomonas for soxR and AAC(3)-Ic genes, Mycobacterium for arr-1 gene, and Rhodococcus for iri gene (Table S18). Phages transducing these four bacterial genera are shown in Table S2. Complete list of bacterial pathogens at the species level with prevalent ARGs is available in CARD (https://card.mcmaster.ca/prevalence). Query abundance of genes encoding ARGs of soil microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum is shown in Table S16, while that for the selected six phage ARGs is described in Fig. 8 and Table S17. In comparison to bulk soil, rhizospheric soil had larger concentrations of these ARGs (Fig. 8) and their associated bacterial hosts (Fig. 1). Table S18 provides a description of these six ARGs in CARD, including information about their antimicrobial resistance (AMR) gene families, drug classes, and resistance mechanisms. The ARGs oleC and soxR belong to the “antibiotic efflux pump“ resistance mechanism, while the ARG parY mutant belongs to the “antibiotic target alteration” resistance mechanism, and the ARGs arr-1, iri, and ACC(3)-Ic belong to the “antibiotic inactivation“ resistance mechanism.Fig. 7Query number referring to the most abundant (≥15) non-redundant phage antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S14.Fig. 8Abundance of gene queries referring to the most abundant (≥15) non-redundant phage antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S16. Fig. 7Query number referring to the most abundant (≥15) non-redundant phage antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S14. Fig. 7Query number referring to the most abundant (≥15) non-redundant phage antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S14. Query number referring to the most abundant (≥15) non-redundant phage antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S14. Query number referring to the most abundant (≥15) non-redundant phage antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S14. Fig. 8Abundance of gene queries referring to the most abundant (≥15) non-redundant phage antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S16. Fig. 8Abundance of gene queries referring to the most abundant (≥15) non-redundant phage antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S16. Abundance of gene queries referring to the most abundant (≥15) non-redundant phage antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S16. Abundance of gene queries referring to the most abundant (≥15) non-redundant phage antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil, e.g., bulk (S) and rhizosphere (R), microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. For more details see Table S16. Discussion Discussion Cazymes encoded by rhizospheric phageome Cazymes encoded by rhizospheric phageome Cazymes encoded by rhizospheric phageome In this study, 19 CAZymes (Fig. 5) were shown to be packaged into phages from members of nine bacterial genera (Fig. 2). These CAZymes belong to five different CAZy families; GH4, GH6, GH12, GH15 and GH43 (Fig. 3). Note that the GH43 family, which debranches and degrades hemicellulose, is one of the largest GH families in terms of CAZyme number (Mewis et al., 2016). Some CAZymes of the CAZy family GH43 have discrete features as the optimal activity of these enzymes may require more than one substrate (Romeis et al., 1993). Eleven CAZymes from the present study were further examined because they exist in the KEGG pathways (Fig. 6). In this study, 19 CAZymes (Fig. 5) were shown to be packaged into phages from members of nine bacterial genera (Fig. 2). These CAZymes belong to five different CAZy families; GH4, GH6, GH12, GH15 and GH43 (Fig. 3). Note that the GH43 family, which debranches and degrades hemicellulose, is one of the largest GH families in terms of CAZyme number (Mewis et al., 2016). Some CAZymes of the CAZy family GH43 have discrete features as the optimal activity of these enzymes may require more than one substrate (Romeis et al., 1993). Eleven CAZymes from the present study were further examined because they exist in the KEGG pathways (Fig. 6). In this study, 19 CAZymes (Fig. 5) were shown to be packaged into phages from members of nine bacterial genera (Fig. 2). These CAZymes belong to five different CAZy families; GH4, GH6, GH12, GH15 and GH43 (Fig. 3). Note that the GH43 family, which debranches and degrades hemicellulose, is one of the largest GH families in terms of CAZyme number (Mewis et al., 2016). Some CAZymes of the CAZy family GH43 have discrete features as the optimal activity of these enzymes may require more than one substrate (Romeis et al., 1993). Eleven CAZymes from the present study were further examined because they exist in the KEGG pathways (Fig. 6). The first pathway is “Starch and sucrose metabolism” (map00500) that has eight enriched CAZymes from the GH4, GH6, GH12, and GH15 families in the rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum (Fig. S1). Interestingly, these CAZymes promoted glucose biosynthesis through 10 different avenues or passages (Fig. 9). The first two avenues included alpha-glucosidase, which converts sucrose in the first avenue and maltose in the second avenue to D-glucose (Fig. 9). The bifunctional CAZyme endoglucanase, which is engaged in the conversion of cellulose to cellodextrin and then cellobiose via this CAZyme and cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase refers to the third route, while the fourth route utilizes CAZyme cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase, which directly transforms cellulose into cellobiose (Figs. 9 and S1). However, the enrichment of CAZyme beta-glucosidase was not high enough to convert cellobiose to glucose, but this step of the avenue may occur simultaneously due to the high enrichment of the two previous steps of this avenue. The fifth avenue includes CAZyme 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase, which converts cellobiose-6P produced from extracellular cellobiose into D-glucose. The sixth and seventh avenues include CAZyme maltose-6-phosphate glucosidase, which converts both trehalose-6P and maltose-6P into D-glucose, while the eighth avenue includes CAZyme alpha_alpha-trehalase, which converts trehalose into D-glucose (Fig. 9). The ninth and tenth avenues involve CAZyme glucoamylase, which converts dextrin and starch into D-glucose (Fig. 9). These 10 enriched avenues of rhizospheric soil phageome of A. fruticosum likely lead to D-glucose biosynthesis at a very high level.Fig. 9Enriched avenues of the KEGG pathway “Starch and sucrose metabolism” referring to phageome CAZymes of CAZy families GH4, GH6, GH12 and GH15 in phageome of Abutilon fruticosum. EC 3.2.1.20 = alpha-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.86 = 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.122 = maltose-6-phosphate glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.4 = endoglucanase, EC 3.2.1.91 = cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase, EC 3.2.1.3 = glucoamylase, EC 3.2.1.28 = alpha_alpha-trehalase. More details are available in Fig. S1. Blue dashed arrows refer to un-enriched steps in the pathway. The first pathway is “Starch and sucrose metabolism” (map00500) that has eight enriched CAZymes from the GH4, GH6, GH12, and GH15 families in the rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum (Fig. S1). Interestingly, these CAZymes promoted glucose biosynthesis through 10 different avenues or passages (Fig. 9). The first two avenues included alpha-glucosidase, which converts sucrose in the first avenue and maltose in the second avenue to D-glucose (Fig. 9). The bifunctional CAZyme endoglucanase, which is engaged in the conversion of cellulose to cellodextrin and then cellobiose via this CAZyme and cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase refers to the third route, while the fourth route utilizes CAZyme cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase, which directly transforms cellulose into cellobiose (Figs. 9 and S1). However, the enrichment of CAZyme beta-glucosidase was not high enough to convert cellobiose to glucose, but this step of the avenue may occur simultaneously due to the high enrichment of the two previous steps of this avenue. The fifth avenue includes CAZyme 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase, which converts cellobiose-6P produced from extracellular cellobiose into D-glucose. The sixth and seventh avenues include CAZyme maltose-6-phosphate glucosidase, which converts both trehalose-6P and maltose-6P into D-glucose, while the eighth avenue includes CAZyme alpha_alpha-trehalase, which converts trehalose into D-glucose (Fig. 9). The ninth and tenth avenues involve CAZyme glucoamylase, which converts dextrin and starch into D-glucose (Fig. 9). These 10 enriched avenues of rhizospheric soil phageome of A. fruticosum likely lead to D-glucose biosynthesis at a very high level.Fig. 9Enriched avenues of the KEGG pathway “Starch and sucrose metabolism” referring to phageome CAZymes of CAZy families GH4, GH6, GH12 and GH15 in phageome of Abutilon fruticosum. EC 3.2.1.20 = alpha-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.86 = 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.122 = maltose-6-phosphate glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.4 = endoglucanase, EC 3.2.1.91 = cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase, EC 3.2.1.3 = glucoamylase, EC 3.2.1.28 = alpha_alpha-trehalase. More details are available in Fig. S1. Blue dashed arrows refer to un-enriched steps in the pathway. The first pathway is “Starch and sucrose metabolism” (map00500) that has eight enriched CAZymes from the GH4, GH6, GH12, and GH15 families in the rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum (Fig. S1). Interestingly, these CAZymes promoted glucose biosynthesis through 10 different avenues or passages (Fig. 9). The first two avenues included alpha-glucosidase, which converts sucrose in the first avenue and maltose in the second avenue to D-glucose (Fig. 9). The bifunctional CAZyme endoglucanase, which is engaged in the conversion of cellulose to cellodextrin and then cellobiose via this CAZyme and cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase refers to the third route, while the fourth route utilizes CAZyme cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase, which directly transforms cellulose into cellobiose (Figs. 9 and S1). However, the enrichment of CAZyme beta-glucosidase was not high enough to convert cellobiose to glucose, but this step of the avenue may occur simultaneously due to the high enrichment of the two previous steps of this avenue. The fifth avenue includes CAZyme 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase, which converts cellobiose-6P produced from extracellular cellobiose into D-glucose. The sixth and seventh avenues include CAZyme maltose-6-phosphate glucosidase, which converts both trehalose-6P and maltose-6P into D-glucose, while the eighth avenue includes CAZyme alpha_alpha-trehalase, which converts trehalose into D-glucose (Fig. 9). The ninth and tenth avenues involve CAZyme glucoamylase, which converts dextrin and starch into D-glucose (Fig. 9). These 10 enriched avenues of rhizospheric soil phageome of A. fruticosum likely lead to D-glucose biosynthesis at a very high level.Fig. 9Enriched avenues of the KEGG pathway “Starch and sucrose metabolism” referring to phageome CAZymes of CAZy families GH4, GH6, GH12 and GH15 in phageome of Abutilon fruticosum. EC 3.2.1.20 = alpha-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.86 = 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.122 = maltose-6-phosphate glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.4 = endoglucanase, EC 3.2.1.91 = cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase, EC 3.2.1.3 = glucoamylase, EC 3.2.1.28 = alpha_alpha-trehalase. More details are available in Fig. S1. Blue dashed arrows refer to un-enriched steps in the pathway. Fig. 9Enriched avenues of the KEGG pathway “Starch and sucrose metabolism” referring to phageome CAZymes of CAZy families GH4, GH6, GH12 and GH15 in phageome of Abutilon fruticosum. EC 3.2.1.20 = alpha-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.86 = 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.122 = maltose-6-phosphate glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.4 = endoglucanase, EC 3.2.1.91 = cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase, EC 3.2.1.3 = glucoamylase, EC 3.2.1.28 = alpha_alpha-trehalase. More details are available in Fig. S1. Blue dashed arrows refer to un-enriched steps in the pathway. Fig. 9Enriched avenues of the KEGG pathway “Starch and sucrose metabolism” referring to phageome CAZymes of CAZy families GH4, GH6, GH12 and GH15 in phageome of Abutilon fruticosum. EC 3.2.1.20 = alpha-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.86 = 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.122 = maltose-6-phosphate glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.4 = endoglucanase, EC 3.2.1.91 = cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase, EC 3.2.1.3 = glucoamylase, EC 3.2.1.28 = alpha_alpha-trehalase. More details are available in Fig. S1. Blue dashed arrows refer to un-enriched steps in the pathway. Fig. 9Enriched avenues of the KEGG pathway “Starch and sucrose metabolism” referring to phageome CAZymes of CAZy families GH4, GH6, GH12 and GH15 in phageome of Abutilon fruticosum. EC 3.2.1.20 = alpha-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.86 = 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.122 = maltose-6-phosphate glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.4 = endoglucanase, EC 3.2.1.91 = cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase, EC 3.2.1.3 = glucoamylase, EC 3.2.1.28 = alpha_alpha-trehalase. More details are available in Fig. S1. Blue dashed arrows refer to un-enriched steps in the pathway. Enriched avenues of the KEGG pathway “Starch and sucrose metabolism” referring to phageome CAZymes of CAZy families GH4, GH6, GH12 and GH15 in phageome of Abutilon fruticosum. EC 3.2.1.20 = alpha-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.86 = 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.122 = maltose-6-phosphate glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.4 = endoglucanase, EC 3.2.1.91 = cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase, EC 3.2.1.3 = glucoamylase, EC 3.2.1.28 = alpha_alpha-trehalase. More details are available in Fig. S1. Blue dashed arrows refer to un-enriched steps in the pathway. Enriched avenues of the KEGG pathway “Starch and sucrose metabolism” referring to phageome CAZymes of CAZy families GH4, GH6, GH12 and GH15 in phageome of Abutilon fruticosum. EC 3.2.1.20 = alpha-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.86 = 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.122 = maltose-6-phosphate glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.4 = endoglucanase, EC 3.2.1.91 = cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase, EC 3.2.1.3 = glucoamylase, EC 3.2.1.28 = alpha_alpha-trehalase. More details are available in Fig. S1. Blue dashed arrows refer to un-enriched steps in the pathway. Enriched avenues of the KEGG pathway “Starch and sucrose metabolism” referring to phageome CAZymes of CAZy families GH4, GH6, GH12 and GH15 in phageome of Abutilon fruticosum. EC 3.2.1.20 = alpha-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.86 = 6-phospho-beta-glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.122 = maltose-6-phosphate glucosidase, EC 3.2.1.4 = endoglucanase, EC 3.2.1.91 = cellulose beta-1,4-cellobiosidase, EC 3.2.1.3 = glucoamylase, EC 3.2.1.28 = alpha_alpha-trehalase. More details are available in Fig. S1. Blue dashed arrows refer to un-enriched steps in the pathway. Plant rhizosphere receives glucose through the process of rhizodeposition as described (Pérez‐Izquierdo et al., 2019). Glucose represents the most useful energy source for all living organisms. Normally, glucose can be stored in the plant in more complex forms as it participates as a substrate in biosynthesizing carbohydrates at different magnitudes (Nakrani et al., 2020). On the other hand, glucose can be broken down by glycolysis followed by Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation to liberate ATPs (Maughan, 2009). Interestingly, it has been previously reported that atmospheric CO2 affects the microbiomes of rhizosphere soil at a much higher rate than that of bulk soil (Phillips et al., 2011). Rhizodeposition process becomes highly enriched when the rate of photosynthesis is low due to heat- or drought-promoted stomatal closure (Pett-Ridge et al., 2021). Even when plant leaves begin to fix CO2 under normal environmental conditions, the partially generated glucose is transferred to the soil by root exudation to cross-talk with the surrounding rhizobiome (Lemoine et al., 2013, Vandenkoornhuyse et al., 2015). The plant's exuded glucose and the glucose produced by the rhizospheric microbiomes can serve as a chemo-attractant for beneficial bacteria to colonize plant roots, acting as a barrier to stop pathogenic bacteria from getting to the roots (Ward et al., 1997, Bais et al., 2004). In return, soil microbes that respond to glucose exudation begin to initiate the synthesis of other forms of carbohydrates and drop them all into the rhizospheric soil sink (pool) to be available to other microbes and to the exuding plant (Lemoine et al., 2013, Castanha et al., 2018, Pett-Ridge et al., 2021). This plant–microbe symbiotic structure is called a holobiont (Vandenkoornhuyse et al., 2015). Maintaining stored glucose in the soil sink also avoids severe consequences of glucose deprivation in plant and microbial cells and the consequent induction of cell death mediated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Graham et al., 2012). On the other hand, elevated glucose levels improve aspects of the root zone like root vitality, morphology, and biomass and enhances metabolism/assimilation of key nitrogen into free amino acids that are collectively required by the plant and its rhizobiome (Qi et al., 2022). Plant rhizosphere receives glucose through the process of rhizodeposition as described (Pérez‐Izquierdo et al., 2019). Glucose represents the most useful energy source for all living organisms. Normally, glucose can be stored in the plant in more complex forms as it participates as a substrate in biosynthesizing carbohydrates at different magnitudes (Nakrani et al., 2020). On the other hand, glucose can be broken down by glycolysis followed by Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation to liberate ATPs (Maughan, 2009). Interestingly, it has been previously reported that atmospheric CO2 affects the microbiomes of rhizosphere soil at a much higher rate than that of bulk soil (Phillips et al., 2011). Rhizodeposition process becomes highly enriched when the rate of photosynthesis is low due to heat- or drought-promoted stomatal closure (Pett-Ridge et al., 2021). Even when plant leaves begin to fix CO2 under normal environmental conditions, the partially generated glucose is transferred to the soil by root exudation to cross-talk with the surrounding rhizobiome (Lemoine et al., 2013, Vandenkoornhuyse et al., 2015). The plant's exuded glucose and the glucose produced by the rhizospheric microbiomes can serve as a chemo-attractant for beneficial bacteria to colonize plant roots, acting as a barrier to stop pathogenic bacteria from getting to the roots (Ward et al., 1997, Bais et al., 2004). In return, soil microbes that respond to glucose exudation begin to initiate the synthesis of other forms of carbohydrates and drop them all into the rhizospheric soil sink (pool) to be available to other microbes and to the exuding plant (Lemoine et al., 2013, Castanha et al., 2018, Pett-Ridge et al., 2021). This plant–microbe symbiotic structure is called a holobiont (Vandenkoornhuyse et al., 2015). Maintaining stored glucose in the soil sink also avoids severe consequences of glucose deprivation in plant and microbial cells and the consequent induction of cell death mediated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Graham et al., 2012). On the other hand, elevated glucose levels improve aspects of the root zone like root vitality, morphology, and biomass and enhances metabolism/assimilation of key nitrogen into free amino acids that are collectively required by the plant and its rhizobiome (Qi et al., 2022). Plant rhizosphere receives glucose through the process of rhizodeposition as described (Pérez‐Izquierdo et al., 2019). Glucose represents the most useful energy source for all living organisms. Normally, glucose can be stored in the plant in more complex forms as it participates as a substrate in biosynthesizing carbohydrates at different magnitudes (Nakrani et al., 2020). On the other hand, glucose can be broken down by glycolysis followed by Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation to liberate ATPs (Maughan, 2009). Interestingly, it has been previously reported that atmospheric CO2 affects the microbiomes of rhizosphere soil at a much higher rate than that of bulk soil (Phillips et al., 2011). Rhizodeposition process becomes highly enriched when the rate of photosynthesis is low due to heat- or drought-promoted stomatal closure (Pett-Ridge et al., 2021). Even when plant leaves begin to fix CO2 under normal environmental conditions, the partially generated glucose is transferred to the soil by root exudation to cross-talk with the surrounding rhizobiome (Lemoine et al., 2013, Vandenkoornhuyse et al., 2015). The plant's exuded glucose and the glucose produced by the rhizospheric microbiomes can serve as a chemo-attractant for beneficial bacteria to colonize plant roots, acting as a barrier to stop pathogenic bacteria from getting to the roots (Ward et al., 1997, Bais et al., 2004). In return, soil microbes that respond to glucose exudation begin to initiate the synthesis of other forms of carbohydrates and drop them all into the rhizospheric soil sink (pool) to be available to other microbes and to the exuding plant (Lemoine et al., 2013, Castanha et al., 2018, Pett-Ridge et al., 2021). This plant–microbe symbiotic structure is called a holobiont (Vandenkoornhuyse et al., 2015). Maintaining stored glucose in the soil sink also avoids severe consequences of glucose deprivation in plant and microbial cells and the consequent induction of cell death mediated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Graham et al., 2012). On the other hand, elevated glucose levels improve aspects of the root zone like root vitality, morphology, and biomass and enhances metabolism/assimilation of key nitrogen into free amino acids that are collectively required by the plant and its rhizobiome (Qi et al., 2022). A second KEGG pathway that was highly enriched in the rhizospheric soil phageome of A. fruticosum is “Galactose metabolism” (map00052) (Fig. S2). Two CAZymes of the GH4 CAZy family were enriched in this pathway. The first is alpha-glucosidase, which was previously indicated for the conversion of sucrose and maltose into D-glucose (Fig. 9). The second CAZyme, e.g., alpha-galactosidase, is also effective in the biosynthesis of glucose as well as several other monosaccharides including mannose and galactose, in addition to two disaccharides namely sucrose and melibiose, one trisaccharide namely raffinose, one alcohol namely glycerol, one sugar alcohol namely sorbitol as well as one carbocyclic sugar namely myo-inositol (Fig. S2). The function of this homodimeric enzyme includes the catalysis of several catabolic processes, e.g., the cleavage of glycoproteins, glycolipids, and polysaccharides (Fig. 10). This CAZyme is also a member of GH27 CAZy family (Naumoff, 2004) and is shown to participate in the biosynthesis (source) and storage (sink) of different forms of carbohydrates when they are enriched in rhizospheric soil phageome of A. fruticosum. Subsequently, the enrichment of the CAZyme alpha-galactosidase promotes the cross-talk between the pathways “Starch and sucrose metabolism” (map00500) and “Galactose metabolism” (map00052) and also promotes the wealth of the different carbohydrate forms in the rhizospheric soil sink of A. fruticosum.Fig. 10Metabolites generated from the action of the multifunctional phageome CAZyme alpha-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.22) of CAZy family GH4 in the KEGG pathway “Galactose metabolism” (map00052). Arrow heads refer to the metabolites with high influence on the microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. Raffinose is the substrate of the CAZyme towards the production of sucrose, while melibiose towards the production of D-galactose and D-glucose. Metabolites in white are the substrates of the CAZyme alpha-galactosidase. More details are available in Fig. S2. A second KEGG pathway that was highly enriched in the rhizospheric soil phageome of A. fruticosum is “Galactose metabolism” (map00052) (Fig. S2). Two CAZymes of the GH4 CAZy family were enriched in this pathway. The first is alpha-glucosidase, which was previously indicated for the conversion of sucrose and maltose into D-glucose (Fig. 9). The second CAZyme, e.g., alpha-galactosidase, is also effective in the biosynthesis of glucose as well as several other monosaccharides including mannose and galactose, in addition to two disaccharides namely sucrose and melibiose, one trisaccharide namely raffinose, one alcohol namely glycerol, one sugar alcohol namely sorbitol as well as one carbocyclic sugar namely myo-inositol (Fig. S2). The function of this homodimeric enzyme includes the catalysis of several catabolic processes, e.g., the cleavage of glycoproteins, glycolipids, and polysaccharides (Fig. 10). This CAZyme is also a member of GH27 CAZy family (Naumoff, 2004) and is shown to participate in the biosynthesis (source) and storage (sink) of different forms of carbohydrates when they are enriched in rhizospheric soil phageome of A. fruticosum. Subsequently, the enrichment of the CAZyme alpha-galactosidase promotes the cross-talk between the pathways “Starch and sucrose metabolism” (map00500) and “Galactose metabolism” (map00052) and also promotes the wealth of the different carbohydrate forms in the rhizospheric soil sink of A. fruticosum.Fig. 10Metabolites generated from the action of the multifunctional phageome CAZyme alpha-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.22) of CAZy family GH4 in the KEGG pathway “Galactose metabolism” (map00052). Arrow heads refer to the metabolites with high influence on the microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. Raffinose is the substrate of the CAZyme towards the production of sucrose, while melibiose towards the production of D-galactose and D-glucose. Metabolites in white are the substrates of the CAZyme alpha-galactosidase. More details are available in Fig. S2. A second KEGG pathway that was highly enriched in the rhizospheric soil phageome of A. fruticosum is “Galactose metabolism” (map00052) (Fig. S2). Two CAZymes of the GH4 CAZy family were enriched in this pathway. The first is alpha-glucosidase, which was previously indicated for the conversion of sucrose and maltose into D-glucose (Fig. 9). The second CAZyme, e.g., alpha-galactosidase, is also effective in the biosynthesis of glucose as well as several other monosaccharides including mannose and galactose, in addition to two disaccharides namely sucrose and melibiose, one trisaccharide namely raffinose, one alcohol namely glycerol, one sugar alcohol namely sorbitol as well as one carbocyclic sugar namely myo-inositol (Fig. S2). The function of this homodimeric enzyme includes the catalysis of several catabolic processes, e.g., the cleavage of glycoproteins, glycolipids, and polysaccharides (Fig. 10). This CAZyme is also a member of GH27 CAZy family (Naumoff, 2004) and is shown to participate in the biosynthesis (source) and storage (sink) of different forms of carbohydrates when they are enriched in rhizospheric soil phageome of A. fruticosum. Subsequently, the enrichment of the CAZyme alpha-galactosidase promotes the cross-talk between the pathways “Starch and sucrose metabolism” (map00500) and “Galactose metabolism” (map00052) and also promotes the wealth of the different carbohydrate forms in the rhizospheric soil sink of A. fruticosum.Fig. 10Metabolites generated from the action of the multifunctional phageome CAZyme alpha-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.22) of CAZy family GH4 in the KEGG pathway “Galactose metabolism” (map00052). Arrow heads refer to the metabolites with high influence on the microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. Raffinose is the substrate of the CAZyme towards the production of sucrose, while melibiose towards the production of D-galactose and D-glucose. Metabolites in white are the substrates of the CAZyme alpha-galactosidase. More details are available in Fig. S2. Fig. 10Metabolites generated from the action of the multifunctional phageome CAZyme alpha-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.22) of CAZy family GH4 in the KEGG pathway “Galactose metabolism” (map00052). Arrow heads refer to the metabolites with high influence on the microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. Raffinose is the substrate of the CAZyme towards the production of sucrose, while melibiose towards the production of D-galactose and D-glucose. Metabolites in white are the substrates of the CAZyme alpha-galactosidase. More details are available in Fig. S2. Fig. 10Metabolites generated from the action of the multifunctional phageome CAZyme alpha-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.22) of CAZy family GH4 in the KEGG pathway “Galactose metabolism” (map00052). Arrow heads refer to the metabolites with high influence on the microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. Raffinose is the substrate of the CAZyme towards the production of sucrose, while melibiose towards the production of D-galactose and D-glucose. Metabolites in white are the substrates of the CAZyme alpha-galactosidase. More details are available in Fig. S2. Fig. 10Metabolites generated from the action of the multifunctional phageome CAZyme alpha-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.22) of CAZy family GH4 in the KEGG pathway “Galactose metabolism” (map00052). Arrow heads refer to the metabolites with high influence on the microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. Raffinose is the substrate of the CAZyme towards the production of sucrose, while melibiose towards the production of D-galactose and D-glucose. Metabolites in white are the substrates of the CAZyme alpha-galactosidase. More details are available in Fig. S2. Metabolites generated from the action of the multifunctional phageome CAZyme alpha-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.22) of CAZy family GH4 in the KEGG pathway “Galactose metabolism” (map00052). Arrow heads refer to the metabolites with high influence on the microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. Raffinose is the substrate of the CAZyme towards the production of sucrose, while melibiose towards the production of D-galactose and D-glucose. Metabolites in white are the substrates of the CAZyme alpha-galactosidase. More details are available in Fig. S2. Metabolites generated from the action of the multifunctional phageome CAZyme alpha-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.22) of CAZy family GH4 in the KEGG pathway “Galactose metabolism” (map00052). Arrow heads refer to the metabolites with high influence on the microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. Raffinose is the substrate of the CAZyme towards the production of sucrose, while melibiose towards the production of D-galactose and D-glucose. Metabolites in white are the substrates of the CAZyme alpha-galactosidase. More details are available in Fig. S2. Metabolites generated from the action of the multifunctional phageome CAZyme alpha-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.22) of CAZy family GH4 in the KEGG pathway “Galactose metabolism” (map00052). Arrow heads refer to the metabolites with high influence on the microbiomes of Abutilon fruticosum. Raffinose is the substrate of the CAZyme towards the production of sucrose, while melibiose towards the production of D-galactose and D-glucose. Metabolites in white are the substrates of the CAZyme alpha-galactosidase. More details are available in Fig. S2. The CAZyme exo-polygalacturonase of the KEGG pathway “Pentose and glucuronate interconversions” (map00040) and the CAZy family GH4 was enriched in rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum (Fig. S3). In order to produce the negatively charged amino monomeric sugar D-galact uronate, GH4 family hydrolyzes the first glycosidic bond from the non-reducing end of the digalacturonate substrate (Parisot et al., 2003). In plants and prokaryotes, D-galacturonate functions as the structural backbone of the pectic cell wall components presumably as an α-(1 → 4)-linked homopolymer and aids in the borate-mediated cross-linking of the cell wall (O'Neill et al., 2001, Ridley et al., 2001). This molecule also aids in cell adhesion and separation as well as cell wall hydration, porosity, and expansion (Xiao and Anderson, 2013). No conclusive information is available on the two CAZymes beta-xylosidase and alpha-L-arabinofuranosidase of the KEGG pathway “Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism” and the CAZy family GH43, which were enriched in rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum (Fig. S4), except that they may enhance the enrichment of the previous pathway, e.g., “Pentose and glucuronate interconversions” through D-xylobiose biosynthesis. The CAZyme exo-polygalacturonase of the KEGG pathway “Pentose and glucuronate interconversions” (map00040) and the CAZy family GH4 was enriched in rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum (Fig. S3). In order to produce the negatively charged amino monomeric sugar D-galact uronate, GH4 family hydrolyzes the first glycosidic bond from the non-reducing end of the digalacturonate substrate (Parisot et al., 2003). In plants and prokaryotes, D-galacturonate functions as the structural backbone of the pectic cell wall components presumably as an α-(1 → 4)-linked homopolymer and aids in the borate-mediated cross-linking of the cell wall (O'Neill et al., 2001, Ridley et al., 2001). This molecule also aids in cell adhesion and separation as well as cell wall hydration, porosity, and expansion (Xiao and Anderson, 2013). No conclusive information is available on the two CAZymes beta-xylosidase and alpha-L-arabinofuranosidase of the KEGG pathway “Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism” and the CAZy family GH43, which were enriched in rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum (Fig. S4), except that they may enhance the enrichment of the previous pathway, e.g., “Pentose and glucuronate interconversions” through D-xylobiose biosynthesis. The CAZyme exo-polygalacturonase of the KEGG pathway “Pentose and glucuronate interconversions” (map00040) and the CAZy family GH4 was enriched in rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum (Fig. S3). In order to produce the negatively charged amino monomeric sugar D-galact uronate, GH4 family hydrolyzes the first glycosidic bond from the non-reducing end of the digalacturonate substrate (Parisot et al., 2003). In plants and prokaryotes, D-galacturonate functions as the structural backbone of the pectic cell wall components presumably as an α-(1 → 4)-linked homopolymer and aids in the borate-mediated cross-linking of the cell wall (O'Neill et al., 2001, Ridley et al., 2001). This molecule also aids in cell adhesion and separation as well as cell wall hydration, porosity, and expansion (Xiao and Anderson, 2013). No conclusive information is available on the two CAZymes beta-xylosidase and alpha-L-arabinofuranosidase of the KEGG pathway “Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism” and the CAZy family GH43, which were enriched in rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum (Fig. S4), except that they may enhance the enrichment of the previous pathway, e.g., “Pentose and glucuronate interconversions” through D-xylobiose biosynthesis. ARGs encoded by rhizospheric soil phageome ARGs encoded by rhizospheric soil phageome ARGs encoded by rhizospheric soil phageome When phage unintentionally absorbs bacterial DNA rather than its own during the generalized process of transduction, the phenomenon of accidental packaging of bacterial genes occurs (Chiang et al., 2019). Accidental packaging of ARGs in phageomes of freshwater and wastewater metagenomics was recently investigated (Moon et al., 2020, Wang et al., 2021). In the latter reports, the researchers demonstrated packaging of numerous ARGs in phageomes of such metagenomes. Another case has been demonstrated for the detection of ARGs in phageome of healthy human gut microbiome (Fernandez-Orth et al., 2019). It is also suggested that resistomes of wild plant species could contain novel ARGs and resistance mechanisms. This condition could eventually cause a serious problem and pose a potential risk of horizontal gene transfer (HGT) of ARGs occurring across different hosts until they are integrated into the genomes of human clinical isolates, especially when these novel ARGs are packaged in disseminating phageome (Obermeier et al., 2021). Sewage and hospital effluents, which contain mobile genetic elements (MGEs) like phageomes are ecological niches that encourage the development of HGT (Von Wintersdorff et al., 2016). Within this context, ARGs could function in fueling evolution of human disease-causing bacterial strains (Burmeister, 2015). The problem becomes even greater if the soil bacteria that harbor the new ARG are included among the human gut pathogens. Without needing to be horizontally transmitted to clinical human isolates with genetic ties, this sort of bacteria could directly endanger human health. Even if these bacteria are included within the commensal human gut colonizer microbes, they can still be dangerous as these microbes can be turned pathobiont when they incorporate abundant ARGs into their cells (Kittana et al., 2018, Seishima et al., 2019). Additionally, other reports suggested that commensal microbes that are resistant to a specific administrated antibiotic can confer colonization resistance against pathogenic microbes, thus protecting the human host from pathogen-promoting disease (Caballero et al., 2017). When phage unintentionally absorbs bacterial DNA rather than its own during the generalized process of transduction, the phenomenon of accidental packaging of bacterial genes occurs (Chiang et al., 2019). Accidental packaging of ARGs in phageomes of freshwater and wastewater metagenomics was recently investigated (Moon et al., 2020, Wang et al., 2021). In the latter reports, the researchers demonstrated packaging of numerous ARGs in phageomes of such metagenomes. Another case has been demonstrated for the detection of ARGs in phageome of healthy human gut microbiome (Fernandez-Orth et al., 2019). It is also suggested that resistomes of wild plant species could contain novel ARGs and resistance mechanisms. This condition could eventually cause a serious problem and pose a potential risk of horizontal gene transfer (HGT) of ARGs occurring across different hosts until they are integrated into the genomes of human clinical isolates, especially when these novel ARGs are packaged in disseminating phageome (Obermeier et al., 2021). Sewage and hospital effluents, which contain mobile genetic elements (MGEs) like phageomes are ecological niches that encourage the development of HGT (Von Wintersdorff et al., 2016). Within this context, ARGs could function in fueling evolution of human disease-causing bacterial strains (Burmeister, 2015). The problem becomes even greater if the soil bacteria that harbor the new ARG are included among the human gut pathogens. Without needing to be horizontally transmitted to clinical human isolates with genetic ties, this sort of bacteria could directly endanger human health. Even if these bacteria are included within the commensal human gut colonizer microbes, they can still be dangerous as these microbes can be turned pathobiont when they incorporate abundant ARGs into their cells (Kittana et al., 2018, Seishima et al., 2019). Additionally, other reports suggested that commensal microbes that are resistant to a specific administrated antibiotic can confer colonization resistance against pathogenic microbes, thus protecting the human host from pathogen-promoting disease (Caballero et al., 2017). When phage unintentionally absorbs bacterial DNA rather than its own during the generalized process of transduction, the phenomenon of accidental packaging of bacterial genes occurs (Chiang et al., 2019). Accidental packaging of ARGs in phageomes of freshwater and wastewater metagenomics was recently investigated (Moon et al., 2020, Wang et al., 2021). In the latter reports, the researchers demonstrated packaging of numerous ARGs in phageomes of such metagenomes. Another case has been demonstrated for the detection of ARGs in phageome of healthy human gut microbiome (Fernandez-Orth et al., 2019). It is also suggested that resistomes of wild plant species could contain novel ARGs and resistance mechanisms. This condition could eventually cause a serious problem and pose a potential risk of horizontal gene transfer (HGT) of ARGs occurring across different hosts until they are integrated into the genomes of human clinical isolates, especially when these novel ARGs are packaged in disseminating phageome (Obermeier et al., 2021). Sewage and hospital effluents, which contain mobile genetic elements (MGEs) like phageomes are ecological niches that encourage the development of HGT (Von Wintersdorff et al., 2016). Within this context, ARGs could function in fueling evolution of human disease-causing bacterial strains (Burmeister, 2015). The problem becomes even greater if the soil bacteria that harbor the new ARG are included among the human gut pathogens. Without needing to be horizontally transmitted to clinical human isolates with genetic ties, this sort of bacteria could directly endanger human health. Even if these bacteria are included within the commensal human gut colonizer microbes, they can still be dangerous as these microbes can be turned pathobiont when they incorporate abundant ARGs into their cells (Kittana et al., 2018, Seishima et al., 2019). Additionally, other reports suggested that commensal microbes that are resistant to a specific administrated antibiotic can confer colonization resistance against pathogenic microbes, thus protecting the human host from pathogen-promoting disease (Caballero et al., 2017). In this study, six phageome ARGs, e.g., oleC, soxR, parY mutant, arr-1, iri and AAC(3)-Ic, were shown to be highly abundant (≥15) in the rhizosphere of Abutilon fruticosum (Fig. 7). The six genes showed higher abundance in phageome of rhizobiome of A. fruticosum than that of the bulk soil (Fig. 8). In support of these findings, abundance of bacterial genera harboring these genes, e.g., Streptomyces for oleC and parY mutant, Pseudomonas for soxR and AAC(3)-Ic genes, Mycobacterium for arr-1 gene, and Rhodococcus for iri gene, was shown to be greater in the rhizosphere of A. fruticosum than in that of the bulk soil (Fig. 2). These ARGs are present in bacterial genera with both commensal and pathogenic species and are recorded in CARD as being prevalent in human pathogenic colonizers (https://card.mcmaster.ca). The phageome of the rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum conferred resistance through known mechanisms in the microbiome (Peterson and Kaur, 2018, Wilson et al., 2020). These included “antibiotic efflux pump” for the oleC and soxR genes, “antibiotic target alteration” for the parY mutant gene, while “antibiotic inactivation” for the arr-1, iri and AAC(3)-Ic genes (Table S18). The resistance mechanisms of these ARGs are investigated to describe the mode of action, and the consequences of being horizontally transferred. In this study, six phageome ARGs, e.g., oleC, soxR, parY mutant, arr-1, iri and AAC(3)-Ic, were shown to be highly abundant (≥15) in the rhizosphere of Abutilon fruticosum (Fig. 7). The six genes showed higher abundance in phageome of rhizobiome of A. fruticosum than that of the bulk soil (Fig. 8). In support of these findings, abundance of bacterial genera harboring these genes, e.g., Streptomyces for oleC and parY mutant, Pseudomonas for soxR and AAC(3)-Ic genes, Mycobacterium for arr-1 gene, and Rhodococcus for iri gene, was shown to be greater in the rhizosphere of A. fruticosum than in that of the bulk soil (Fig. 2). These ARGs are present in bacterial genera with both commensal and pathogenic species and are recorded in CARD as being prevalent in human pathogenic colonizers (https://card.mcmaster.ca). The phageome of the rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum conferred resistance through known mechanisms in the microbiome (Peterson and Kaur, 2018, Wilson et al., 2020). These included “antibiotic efflux pump” for the oleC and soxR genes, “antibiotic target alteration” for the parY mutant gene, while “antibiotic inactivation” for the arr-1, iri and AAC(3)-Ic genes (Table S18). The resistance mechanisms of these ARGs are investigated to describe the mode of action, and the consequences of being horizontally transferred. In this study, six phageome ARGs, e.g., oleC, soxR, parY mutant, arr-1, iri and AAC(3)-Ic, were shown to be highly abundant (≥15) in the rhizosphere of Abutilon fruticosum (Fig. 7). The six genes showed higher abundance in phageome of rhizobiome of A. fruticosum than that of the bulk soil (Fig. 8). In support of these findings, abundance of bacterial genera harboring these genes, e.g., Streptomyces for oleC and parY mutant, Pseudomonas for soxR and AAC(3)-Ic genes, Mycobacterium for arr-1 gene, and Rhodococcus for iri gene, was shown to be greater in the rhizosphere of A. fruticosum than in that of the bulk soil (Fig. 2). These ARGs are present in bacterial genera with both commensal and pathogenic species and are recorded in CARD as being prevalent in human pathogenic colonizers (https://card.mcmaster.ca). The phageome of the rhizospheric soil of A. fruticosum conferred resistance through known mechanisms in the microbiome (Peterson and Kaur, 2018, Wilson et al., 2020). These included “antibiotic efflux pump” for the oleC and soxR genes, “antibiotic target alteration” for the parY mutant gene, while “antibiotic inactivation” for the arr-1, iri and AAC(3)-Ic genes (Table S18). The resistance mechanisms of these ARGs are investigated to describe the mode of action, and the consequences of being horizontally transferred. Antibiotic efflux pump Antibiotic efflux pump Antibiotic efflux pump Antibiotic efflux pump The antibiotic efflux mechanism in pathogens must be faster than the host’s defense mechanism in order for bacteria to tolerate this adverse condition and be able to continue growing (Koprivnjak and Peschel, 2011). Resistance-nodulation-cell division (RND) for soxR gene is one of the known efflux pump families (Cardona et al., 2018, Tierney and Rather, 2019), while ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family for oleC gene (Table S18). All efflux pumps, including RND family, are energy-dependent and use proton motive forces, except for ABC family, which uses ATP for activation (Chitsaz and Brown, 2017). The antibiotic efflux mechanism in pathogens must be faster than the host’s defense mechanism in order for bacteria to tolerate this adverse condition and be able to continue growing (Koprivnjak and Peschel, 2011). Resistance-nodulation-cell division (RND) for soxR gene is one of the known efflux pump families (Cardona et al., 2018, Tierney and Rather, 2019), while ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family for oleC gene (Table S18). All efflux pumps, including RND family, are energy-dependent and use proton motive forces, except for ABC family, which uses ATP for activation (Chitsaz and Brown, 2017). The antibiotic efflux mechanism in pathogens must be faster than the host’s defense mechanism in order for bacteria to tolerate this adverse condition and be able to continue growing (Koprivnjak and Peschel, 2011). Resistance-nodulation-cell division (RND) for soxR gene is one of the known efflux pump families (Cardona et al., 2018, Tierney and Rather, 2019), while ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family for oleC gene (Table S18). All efflux pumps, including RND family, are energy-dependent and use proton motive forces, except for ABC family, which uses ATP for activation (Chitsaz and Brown, 2017). The antibiotic efflux mechanism in pathogens must be faster than the host’s defense mechanism in order for bacteria to tolerate this adverse condition and be able to continue growing (Koprivnjak and Peschel, 2011). Resistance-nodulation-cell division (RND) for soxR gene is one of the known efflux pump families (Cardona et al., 2018, Tierney and Rather, 2019), while ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family for oleC gene (Table S18). All efflux pumps, including RND family, are energy-dependent and use proton motive forces, except for ABC family, which uses ATP for activation (Chitsaz and Brown, 2017). Large polypeptide chains known as RND superfamily transporters are involved in the excretion of poisons and virulence factors (Coyne et al., 2010). Among the ARGs that utilize this mechanism, the soxR gene in members of genus Pseudomonas, which is abundant in rhizosphere microbiome of A. fruticosum, functions as a transcription factor, as a regulator of redox-active molecules and as a global response modulator of bacterial multidrug resistance (Palma et al., 2005, Lee et al., 2022). soxR gene enhances many RND efflux pump gene complexes including the SoxR/SoxS two-component system (Marchand et al., 2004, Palma et al., 2005, Gu and Imlay, 2011, Sakhtah et al., 2016). While, SoxR protein is enriched either by oxidation (Gaudu et al., 1997) or nitrosylation (Ding and Demple, 2000) in order to trigger expression of the soxS gene; e.g., its other component of the system. SoxS protein, in turn, promotes expression of several resistance genes against oxidants and antibiotics as well as activates the expression of stress regulon (Pomposiello and Demple, 2001, Koutsolioutsou et al., 2005, Lee et al., 2022). Further, SoxS enhances expression of the efflux tripartite transporter namely AcrAB-TolC (White et al., 1997, Pomposiello and Demple, 2001, Ruiz and Levy, 2014, Li et al., 2017). Since superoxide anion cannot get through the bilayer membrane of bacteria, nitric oxide (NO) radicals must instead oxidise SoxR to activate the efflux pump (Pomposiello and Demple, 2001). SoxR can also drive expression of another efflux pump of 6-gene regulon in Pseudomonas aeruginosa and in several other human pathogens (Li et al., 2017), whose analogues in rhizobiome of A. fruticosum are highly abundant. SoxR also acts as a mediator of other efflux pump system namely the major facilitator superfamily (MFS) (Dulyayangkul et al., 2016). This system facilitates removal of absorbed drugs across membranes and prevents transmembrane passage as a result of a chemiosmotic gradient, while only allowing substrate entry into the cell (Marger and Saier, 1993, Abramson et al., 2003). Antibiotic resistance, which is mediated by the soxR/SoxS system, is caused by increased efflux pump activity and decreased permeability of bacterial cell (Koutsolioutsou et al., 2005). Large polypeptide chains known as RND superfamily transporters are involved in the excretion of poisons and virulence factors (Coyne et al., 2010). Among the ARGs that utilize this mechanism, the soxR gene in members of genus Pseudomonas, which is abundant in rhizosphere microbiome of A. fruticosum, functions as a transcription factor, as a regulator of redox-active molecules and as a global response modulator of bacterial multidrug resistance (Palma et al., 2005, Lee et al., 2022). soxR gene enhances many RND efflux pump gene complexes including the SoxR/SoxS two-component system (Marchand et al., 2004, Palma et al., 2005, Gu and Imlay, 2011, Sakhtah et al., 2016). While, SoxR protein is enriched either by oxidation (Gaudu et al., 1997) or nitrosylation (Ding and Demple, 2000) in order to trigger expression of the soxS gene; e.g., its other component of the system. SoxS protein, in turn, promotes expression of several resistance genes against oxidants and antibiotics as well as activates the expression of stress regulon (Pomposiello and Demple, 2001, Koutsolioutsou et al., 2005, Lee et al., 2022). Further, SoxS enhances expression of the efflux tripartite transporter namely AcrAB-TolC (White et al., 1997, Pomposiello and Demple, 2001, Ruiz and Levy, 2014, Li et al., 2017). Since superoxide anion cannot get through the bilayer membrane of bacteria, nitric oxide (NO) radicals must instead oxidise SoxR to activate the efflux pump (Pomposiello and Demple, 2001). SoxR can also drive expression of another efflux pump of 6-gene regulon in Pseudomonas aeruginosa and in several other human pathogens (Li et al., 2017), whose analogues in rhizobiome of A. fruticosum are highly abundant. SoxR also acts as a mediator of other efflux pump system namely the major facilitator superfamily (MFS) (Dulyayangkul et al., 2016). This system facilitates removal of absorbed drugs across membranes and prevents transmembrane passage as a result of a chemiosmotic gradient, while only allowing substrate entry into the cell (Marger and Saier, 1993, Abramson et al., 2003). Antibiotic resistance, which is mediated by the soxR/SoxS system, is caused by increased efflux pump activity and decreased permeability of bacterial cell (Koutsolioutsou et al., 2005). Large polypeptide chains known as RND superfamily transporters are involved in the excretion of poisons and virulence factors (Coyne et al., 2010). Among the ARGs that utilize this mechanism, the soxR gene in members of genus Pseudomonas, which is abundant in rhizosphere microbiome of A. fruticosum, functions as a transcription factor, as a regulator of redox-active molecules and as a global response modulator of bacterial multidrug resistance (Palma et al., 2005, Lee et al., 2022). soxR gene enhances many RND efflux pump gene complexes including the SoxR/SoxS two-component system (Marchand et al., 2004, Palma et al., 2005, Gu and Imlay, 2011, Sakhtah et al., 2016). While, SoxR protein is enriched either by oxidation (Gaudu et al., 1997) or nitrosylation (Ding and Demple, 2000) in order to trigger expression of the soxS gene; e.g., its other component of the system. SoxS protein, in turn, promotes expression of several resistance genes against oxidants and antibiotics as well as activates the expression of stress regulon (Pomposiello and Demple, 2001, Koutsolioutsou et al., 2005, Lee et al., 2022). Further, SoxS enhances expression of the efflux tripartite transporter namely AcrAB-TolC (White et al., 1997, Pomposiello and Demple, 2001, Ruiz and Levy, 2014, Li et al., 2017). Since superoxide anion cannot get through the bilayer membrane of bacteria, nitric oxide (NO) radicals must instead oxidise SoxR to activate the efflux pump (Pomposiello and Demple, 2001). SoxR can also drive expression of another efflux pump of 6-gene regulon in Pseudomonas aeruginosa and in several other human pathogens (Li et al., 2017), whose analogues in rhizobiome of A. fruticosum are highly abundant. SoxR also acts as a mediator of other efflux pump system namely the major facilitator superfamily (MFS) (Dulyayangkul et al., 2016). This system facilitates removal of absorbed drugs across membranes and prevents transmembrane passage as a result of a chemiosmotic gradient, while only allowing substrate entry into the cell (Marger and Saier, 1993, Abramson et al., 2003). Antibiotic resistance, which is mediated by the soxR/SoxS system, is caused by increased efflux pump activity and decreased permeability of bacterial cell (Koutsolioutsou et al., 2005). Large polypeptide chains known as RND superfamily transporters are involved in the excretion of poisons and virulence factors (Coyne et al., 2010). Among the ARGs that utilize this mechanism, the soxR gene in members of genus Pseudomonas, which is abundant in rhizosphere microbiome of A. fruticosum, functions as a transcription factor, as a regulator of redox-active molecules and as a global response modulator of bacterial multidrug resistance (Palma et al., 2005, Lee et al., 2022). soxR gene enhances many RND efflux pump gene complexes including the SoxR/SoxS two-component system (Marchand et al., 2004, Palma et al., 2005, Gu and Imlay, 2011, Sakhtah et al., 2016). While, SoxR protein is enriched either by oxidation (Gaudu et al., 1997) or nitrosylation (Ding and Demple, 2000) in order to trigger expression of the soxS gene; e.g., its other component of the system. SoxS protein, in turn, promotes expression of several resistance genes against oxidants and antibiotics as well as activates the expression of stress regulon (Pomposiello and Demple, 2001, Koutsolioutsou et al., 2005, Lee et al., 2022). Further, SoxS enhances expression of the efflux tripartite transporter namely AcrAB-TolC (White et al., 1997, Pomposiello and Demple, 2001, Ruiz and Levy, 2014, Li et al., 2017). Since superoxide anion cannot get through the bilayer membrane of bacteria, nitric oxide (NO) radicals must instead oxidise SoxR to activate the efflux pump (Pomposiello and Demple, 2001). SoxR can also drive expression of another efflux pump of 6-gene regulon in Pseudomonas aeruginosa and in several other human pathogens (Li et al., 2017), whose analogues in rhizobiome of A. fruticosum are highly abundant. SoxR also acts as a mediator of other efflux pump system namely the major facilitator superfamily (MFS) (Dulyayangkul et al., 2016). This system facilitates removal of absorbed drugs across membranes and prevents transmembrane passage as a result of a chemiosmotic gradient, while only allowing substrate entry into the cell (Marger and Saier, 1993, Abramson et al., 2003). Antibiotic resistance, which is mediated by the soxR/SoxS system, is caused by increased efflux pump activity and decreased permeability of bacterial cell (Koutsolioutsou et al., 2005). Proteins of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) participate in various cellular processes including transmembrane transport (Lefèvre and Boutry, 2018). These proteins belong to a transporter superfamily including a number of - proteins (e.g., ATPases) that is associated with cell membrane in order to transport substances with different properties (Tarling et al., 2013). In this transporter system, the ATPase enzyme uses ATP to activate the pump at the cell membrane of bacteria (Sauna et al., 2009). The two-component OleC4/OleC5 Type I transport system of Streptomyces, which is abundant in the rhizosphere microbiome of A. fruticosum, contains OleC4 (or OleC), which binds the membrane in order to hydrolyze ATP. It also contains OleC5, which is translationally conjugated to OleC and serves as a transport permease protein (Ma Rodriguez et al., 1993, Olano et al., 1996). During the lack of the membrane protein OleC5, OleC transporter can still confer antibiotic resistance (Méndez and Salas, 1998, Méndez and Salas, 2001). A previous report suggested that this transporter provides self-resistance via oleandomycin efflux (Ma Rodriguez et al., 1993). Proteins of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) participate in various cellular processes including transmembrane transport (Lefèvre and Boutry, 2018). These proteins belong to a transporter superfamily including a number of - proteins (e.g., ATPases) that is associated with cell membrane in order to transport substances with different properties (Tarling et al., 2013). In this transporter system, the ATPase enzyme uses ATP to activate the pump at the cell membrane of bacteria (Sauna et al., 2009). The two-component OleC4/OleC5 Type I transport system of Streptomyces, which is abundant in the rhizosphere microbiome of A. fruticosum, contains OleC4 (or OleC), which binds the membrane in order to hydrolyze ATP. It also contains OleC5, which is translationally conjugated to OleC and serves as a transport permease protein (Ma Rodriguez et al., 1993, Olano et al., 1996). During the lack of the membrane protein OleC5, OleC transporter can still confer antibiotic resistance (Méndez and Salas, 1998, Méndez and Salas, 2001). A previous report suggested that this transporter provides self-resistance via oleandomycin efflux (Ma Rodriguez et al., 1993). Proteins of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) participate in various cellular processes including transmembrane transport (Lefèvre and Boutry, 2018). These proteins belong to a transporter superfamily including a number of - proteins (e.g., ATPases) that is associated with cell membrane in order to transport substances with different properties (Tarling et al., 2013). In this transporter system, the ATPase enzyme uses ATP to activate the pump at the cell membrane of bacteria (Sauna et al., 2009). The two-component OleC4/OleC5 Type I transport system of Streptomyces, which is abundant in the rhizosphere microbiome of A. fruticosum, contains OleC4 (or OleC), which binds the membrane in order to hydrolyze ATP. It also contains OleC5, which is translationally conjugated to OleC and serves as a transport permease protein (Ma Rodriguez et al., 1993, Olano et al., 1996). During the lack of the membrane protein OleC5, OleC transporter can still confer antibiotic resistance (Méndez and Salas, 1998, Méndez and Salas, 2001). A previous report suggested that this transporter provides self-resistance via oleandomycin efflux (Ma Rodriguez et al., 1993). Proteins of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) participate in various cellular processes including transmembrane transport (Lefèvre and Boutry, 2018). These proteins belong to a transporter superfamily including a number of - proteins (e.g., ATPases) that is associated with cell membrane in order to transport substances with different properties (Tarling et al., 2013). In this transporter system, the ATPase enzyme uses ATP to activate the pump at the cell membrane of bacteria (Sauna et al., 2009). The two-component OleC4/OleC5 Type I transport system of Streptomyces, which is abundant in the rhizosphere microbiome of A. fruticosum, contains OleC4 (or OleC), which binds the membrane in order to hydrolyze ATP. It also contains OleC5, which is translationally conjugated to OleC and serves as a transport permease protein (Ma Rodriguez et al., 1993, Olano et al., 1996). During the lack of the membrane protein OleC5, OleC transporter can still confer antibiotic resistance (Méndez and Salas, 1998, Méndez and Salas, 2001). A previous report suggested that this transporter provides self-resistance via oleandomycin efflux (Ma Rodriguez et al., 1993). Streptomyces sp. was usually cited as the primary producer of antibiotics (Lee et al., 2007, de Lima Procópio et al., 2012). Additionally, this bacterial genus contains an enzyme that triggers the final step of the production of oleandomycin to produce new antibiotics (Salas et al., 1994). Accordingly, it is possible to use bacteria that harbor Streptomyces phages in order to decipher novel antibiotics for potential application in clinical trials against newly emerging human diseases. Streptomyces sp. was usually cited as the primary producer of antibiotics (Lee et al., 2007, de Lima Procópio et al., 2012). Additionally, this bacterial genus contains an enzyme that triggers the final step of the production of oleandomycin to produce new antibiotics (Salas et al., 1994). Accordingly, it is possible to use bacteria that harbor Streptomyces phages in order to decipher novel antibiotics for potential application in clinical trials against newly emerging human diseases. Streptomyces sp. was usually cited as the primary producer of antibiotics (Lee et al., 2007, de Lima Procópio et al., 2012). Additionally, this bacterial genus contains an enzyme that triggers the final step of the production of oleandomycin to produce new antibiotics (Salas et al., 1994). Accordingly, it is possible to use bacteria that harbor Streptomyces phages in order to decipher novel antibiotics for potential application in clinical trials against newly emerging human diseases. Streptomyces sp. was usually cited as the primary producer of antibiotics (Lee et al., 2007, de Lima Procópio et al., 2012). Additionally, this bacterial genus contains an enzyme that triggers the final step of the production of oleandomycin to produce new antibiotics (Salas et al., 1994). Accordingly, it is possible to use bacteria that harbor Streptomyces phages in order to decipher novel antibiotics for potential application in clinical trials against newly emerging human diseases. Antibiotic target alteration Antibiotic target alteration Antibiotic target alteration Antibiotic target alteration This term refers to the bacteria's low affinity for the antibiotic-binding site (Munita and Arias, 2016). Antibiotic target alteration includes resistance to aminocoumarin and self-resistance parY gene of the genus Streptomyces (Schmutz et al., 2003, Schmutz et al., 2004, Li and Heide, 2006, Shami et al., 2022). Self-resistance refers to antibiotic-producing bacteria that harbor highly complex self-defense mechanisms against their own antibiotics (Peterson and Kaur, 2018). The heterotetrameric enzyme topoisomerase IV (topo IV) is essential for the bacterial cell to decatenate/unbind attached daughter chromosomes during final stage of DNA replication (Alt et al., 2011). Thus, this enzyme is a target for the discovering of new factors to prevent cell division of pathogenic bacteria. Topo IV contains two subunits where the first, e.g., ParC, includes the catalytic domain for cleaving and rejoining DNA, and the second, e.g., ParE, contains the catalytic domain for ATP hydrolysis. Alternatively, species of genus Streptomyces contain analogues of parC/parE gene pair, which is parX/parY. The parY gene participates in aminocoumarin biosynthesis, which acts to inhibit the B subunit of gyrase (Maxwell, 1997). It was reported that Streptomyces has a new type of gyrase to protect it (Schmutz et al., 2004). The modified version of this gene, e.g., gyrBR, has a resistance mechanism similar to that conferred by parYR or parY mutant. Bacteria with altered forms of GyrBR or ParYR protein can approach autoresistance against the harmful effects of aminocoumarin originally produced by these bacteria. Since abundance species of the genus Streptomyces is higher in rhizobiome of A. fruticosum, there is a high possibility that the oleC and parYR genes may pose a risk when transferred to clinical isolates of this bacterial genus that are transduced with any of the Streptomyces phages phiC31, Mildred21, NootNoot, Paradiddles and/or TG1 (Table S2). This term refers to the bacteria's low affinity for the antibiotic-binding site (Munita and Arias, 2016). Antibiotic target alteration includes resistance to aminocoumarin and self-resistance parY gene of the genus Streptomyces (Schmutz et al., 2003, Schmutz et al., 2004, Li and Heide, 2006, Shami et al., 2022). Self-resistance refers to antibiotic-producing bacteria that harbor highly complex self-defense mechanisms against their own antibiotics (Peterson and Kaur, 2018). The heterotetrameric enzyme topoisomerase IV (topo IV) is essential for the bacterial cell to decatenate/unbind attached daughter chromosomes during final stage of DNA replication (Alt et al., 2011). Thus, this enzyme is a target for the discovering of new factors to prevent cell division of pathogenic bacteria. Topo IV contains two subunits where the first, e.g., ParC, includes the catalytic domain for cleaving and rejoining DNA, and the second, e.g., ParE, contains the catalytic domain for ATP hydrolysis. Alternatively, species of genus Streptomyces contain analogues of parC/parE gene pair, which is parX/parY. The parY gene participates in aminocoumarin biosynthesis, which acts to inhibit the B subunit of gyrase (Maxwell, 1997). It was reported that Streptomyces has a new type of gyrase to protect it (Schmutz et al., 2004). The modified version of this gene, e.g., gyrBR, has a resistance mechanism similar to that conferred by parYR or parY mutant. Bacteria with altered forms of GyrBR or ParYR protein can approach autoresistance against the harmful effects of aminocoumarin originally produced by these bacteria. Since abundance species of the genus Streptomyces is higher in rhizobiome of A. fruticosum, there is a high possibility that the oleC and parYR genes may pose a risk when transferred to clinical isolates of this bacterial genus that are transduced with any of the Streptomyces phages phiC31, Mildred21, NootNoot, Paradiddles and/or TG1 (Table S2). This term refers to the bacteria's low affinity for the antibiotic-binding site (Munita and Arias, 2016). Antibiotic target alteration includes resistance to aminocoumarin and self-resistance parY gene of the genus Streptomyces (Schmutz et al., 2003, Schmutz et al., 2004, Li and Heide, 2006, Shami et al., 2022). Self-resistance refers to antibiotic-producing bacteria that harbor highly complex self-defense mechanisms against their own antibiotics (Peterson and Kaur, 2018). The heterotetrameric enzyme topoisomerase IV (topo IV) is essential for the bacterial cell to decatenate/unbind attached daughter chromosomes during final stage of DNA replication (Alt et al., 2011). Thus, this enzyme is a target for the discovering of new factors to prevent cell division of pathogenic bacteria. Topo IV contains two subunits where the first, e.g., ParC, includes the catalytic domain for cleaving and rejoining DNA, and the second, e.g., ParE, contains the catalytic domain for ATP hydrolysis. Alternatively, species of genus Streptomyces contain analogues of parC/parE gene pair, which is parX/parY. The parY gene participates in aminocoumarin biosynthesis, which acts to inhibit the B subunit of gyrase (Maxwell, 1997). It was reported that Streptomyces has a new type of gyrase to protect it (Schmutz et al., 2004). The modified version of this gene, e.g., gyrBR, has a resistance mechanism similar to that conferred by parYR or parY mutant. Bacteria with altered forms of GyrBR or ParYR protein can approach autoresistance against the harmful effects of aminocoumarin originally produced by these bacteria. Since abundance species of the genus Streptomyces is higher in rhizobiome of A. fruticosum, there is a high possibility that the oleC and parYR genes may pose a risk when transferred to clinical isolates of this bacterial genus that are transduced with any of the Streptomyces phages phiC31, Mildred21, NootNoot, Paradiddles and/or TG1 (Table S2). This term refers to the bacteria's low affinity for the antibiotic-binding site (Munita and Arias, 2016). Antibiotic target alteration includes resistance to aminocoumarin and self-resistance parY gene of the genus Streptomyces (Schmutz et al., 2003, Schmutz et al., 2004, Li and Heide, 2006, Shami et al., 2022). Self-resistance refers to antibiotic-producing bacteria that harbor highly complex self-defense mechanisms against their own antibiotics (Peterson and Kaur, 2018). The heterotetrameric enzyme topoisomerase IV (topo IV) is essential for the bacterial cell to decatenate/unbind attached daughter chromosomes during final stage of DNA replication (Alt et al., 2011). Thus, this enzyme is a target for the discovering of new factors to prevent cell division of pathogenic bacteria. Topo IV contains two subunits where the first, e.g., ParC, includes the catalytic domain for cleaving and rejoining DNA, and the second, e.g., ParE, contains the catalytic domain for ATP hydrolysis. Alternatively, species of genus Streptomyces contain analogues of parC/parE gene pair, which is parX/parY. The parY gene participates in aminocoumarin biosynthesis, which acts to inhibit the B subunit of gyrase (Maxwell, 1997). It was reported that Streptomyces has a new type of gyrase to protect it (Schmutz et al., 2004). The modified version of this gene, e.g., gyrBR, has a resistance mechanism similar to that conferred by parYR or parY mutant. Bacteria with altered forms of GyrBR or ParYR protein can approach autoresistance against the harmful effects of aminocoumarin originally produced by these bacteria. Since abundance species of the genus Streptomyces is higher in rhizobiome of A. fruticosum, there is a high possibility that the oleC and parYR genes may pose a risk when transferred to clinical isolates of this bacterial genus that are transduced with any of the Streptomyces phages phiC31, Mildred21, NootNoot, Paradiddles and/or TG1 (Table S2). Antibiotic inactivation Antibiotic inactivation Antibiotic inactivation Antibiotic inactivation The ARGs namely arr-1 and iri are present in rhizobiome of A. fruticosum to enhance resistance against rifampin. This antibiotic is among the therapeutic agents utilized to alleviate pathogenicity of some members of the genera Mycobacterium (Grosset, 1989) and Rhodococcus (Clave et al., 1991). Rifampin interacts with β subunit of RNA polymerase in order to inhibit transcription of the bacterial genes (Andersen et al., 1997). Four mechanisms of resistance to rifampin inactivation exist. Of these, antibiotic phosphorylation is the mechanism of resistance in genera Rhodococcus and Nocardia (Yazawa et al., 1994), while ribosylation in the genus Mycobacterium (Dabbs et al., 1995). The arr-1 gene encodes rifampin ADP-ribosyltransferase, which catalyzes the drug's ADP-ribosylation site, which is critical for enzyme activation (Morgado et al., 2021). In terms of iri (inactive rifampin) gene, it encodes a monooxygenase (hydroxylase)-like sequence, which has chemical properties similar to those of other monooxygenases acting on phenolic compounds (Andersen et al., 1997). The action of the latter enzyme is to attack the naphthalenyl moiety of rifampin (Hoshino et al., 2010). The AAC(3)-Ic gene encodes the AAC(3)-I aminoglycoside 3-N-acetyltransferase in order to provide aminoglycoside resistance against gentamicin and sisomicin in Pseudomonas aeruginosa in which this enzyme has a structure similar to other AAC(3)-I enzymes (Riccio et al., 2003). Aminoglycosides are synergistic with beta-lactams, and thus, constitute a complex to prevent Pseudomonal pathogenicity (Nie et al., 2014). The action of aminoglycosides is to interact with 16S rRNA and thereby inhibit bacterial gene translation (Lioy et al., 2014). Thus, it is possible that AAC(3)-Ic and soxR genes collectively pose a risk of transfer to clinical isolates of the bacterial genus Pseudomonas that are transduced with the Pseudomonas phage Skulduggery (Table S2). The ARGs namely arr-1 and iri are present in rhizobiome of A. fruticosum to enhance resistance against rifampin. This antibiotic is among the therapeutic agents utilized to alleviate pathogenicity of some members of the genera Mycobacterium (Grosset, 1989) and Rhodococcus (Clave et al., 1991). Rifampin interacts with β subunit of RNA polymerase in order to inhibit transcription of the bacterial genes (Andersen et al., 1997). Four mechanisms of resistance to rifampin inactivation exist. Of these, antibiotic phosphorylation is the mechanism of resistance in genera Rhodococcus and Nocardia (Yazawa et al., 1994), while ribosylation in the genus Mycobacterium (Dabbs et al., 1995). The arr-1 gene encodes rifampin ADP-ribosyltransferase, which catalyzes the drug's ADP-ribosylation site, which is critical for enzyme activation (Morgado et al., 2021). In terms of iri (inactive rifampin) gene, it encodes a monooxygenase (hydroxylase)-like sequence, which has chemical properties similar to those of other monooxygenases acting on phenolic compounds (Andersen et al., 1997). The action of the latter enzyme is to attack the naphthalenyl moiety of rifampin (Hoshino et al., 2010). The AAC(3)-Ic gene encodes the AAC(3)-I aminoglycoside 3-N-acetyltransferase in order to provide aminoglycoside resistance against gentamicin and sisomicin in Pseudomonas aeruginosa in which this enzyme has a structure similar to other AAC(3)-I enzymes (Riccio et al., 2003). Aminoglycosides are synergistic with beta-lactams, and thus, constitute a complex to prevent Pseudomonal pathogenicity (Nie et al., 2014). The action of aminoglycosides is to interact with 16S rRNA and thereby inhibit bacterial gene translation (Lioy et al., 2014). Thus, it is possible that AAC(3)-Ic and soxR genes collectively pose a risk of transfer to clinical isolates of the bacterial genus Pseudomonas that are transduced with the Pseudomonas phage Skulduggery (Table S2). The ARGs namely arr-1 and iri are present in rhizobiome of A. fruticosum to enhance resistance against rifampin. This antibiotic is among the therapeutic agents utilized to alleviate pathogenicity of some members of the genera Mycobacterium (Grosset, 1989) and Rhodococcus (Clave et al., 1991). Rifampin interacts with β subunit of RNA polymerase in order to inhibit transcription of the bacterial genes (Andersen et al., 1997). Four mechanisms of resistance to rifampin inactivation exist. Of these, antibiotic phosphorylation is the mechanism of resistance in genera Rhodococcus and Nocardia (Yazawa et al., 1994), while ribosylation in the genus Mycobacterium (Dabbs et al., 1995). The arr-1 gene encodes rifampin ADP-ribosyltransferase, which catalyzes the drug's ADP-ribosylation site, which is critical for enzyme activation (Morgado et al., 2021). In terms of iri (inactive rifampin) gene, it encodes a monooxygenase (hydroxylase)-like sequence, which has chemical properties similar to those of other monooxygenases acting on phenolic compounds (Andersen et al., 1997). The action of the latter enzyme is to attack the naphthalenyl moiety of rifampin (Hoshino et al., 2010). The AAC(3)-Ic gene encodes the AAC(3)-I aminoglycoside 3-N-acetyltransferase in order to provide aminoglycoside resistance against gentamicin and sisomicin in Pseudomonas aeruginosa in which this enzyme has a structure similar to other AAC(3)-I enzymes (Riccio et al., 2003). Aminoglycosides are synergistic with beta-lactams, and thus, constitute a complex to prevent Pseudomonal pathogenicity (Nie et al., 2014). The action of aminoglycosides is to interact with 16S rRNA and thereby inhibit bacterial gene translation (Lioy et al., 2014). Thus, it is possible that AAC(3)-Ic and soxR genes collectively pose a risk of transfer to clinical isolates of the bacterial genus Pseudomonas that are transduced with the Pseudomonas phage Skulduggery (Table S2). The ARGs namely arr-1 and iri are present in rhizobiome of A. fruticosum to enhance resistance against rifampin. This antibiotic is among the therapeutic agents utilized to alleviate pathogenicity of some members of the genera Mycobacterium (Grosset, 1989) and Rhodococcus (Clave et al., 1991). Rifampin interacts with β subunit of RNA polymerase in order to inhibit transcription of the bacterial genes (Andersen et al., 1997). Four mechanisms of resistance to rifampin inactivation exist. Of these, antibiotic phosphorylation is the mechanism of resistance in genera Rhodococcus and Nocardia (Yazawa et al., 1994), while ribosylation in the genus Mycobacterium (Dabbs et al., 1995). The arr-1 gene encodes rifampin ADP-ribosyltransferase, which catalyzes the drug's ADP-ribosylation site, which is critical for enzyme activation (Morgado et al., 2021). In terms of iri (inactive rifampin) gene, it encodes a monooxygenase (hydroxylase)-like sequence, which has chemical properties similar to those of other monooxygenases acting on phenolic compounds (Andersen et al., 1997). The action of the latter enzyme is to attack the naphthalenyl moiety of rifampin (Hoshino et al., 2010). The AAC(3)-Ic gene encodes the AAC(3)-I aminoglycoside 3-N-acetyltransferase in order to provide aminoglycoside resistance against gentamicin and sisomicin in Pseudomonas aeruginosa in which this enzyme has a structure similar to other AAC(3)-I enzymes (Riccio et al., 2003). Aminoglycosides are synergistic with beta-lactams, and thus, constitute a complex to prevent Pseudomonal pathogenicity (Nie et al., 2014). The action of aminoglycosides is to interact with 16S rRNA and thereby inhibit bacterial gene translation (Lioy et al., 2014). Thus, it is possible that AAC(3)-Ic and soxR genes collectively pose a risk of transfer to clinical isolates of the bacterial genus Pseudomonas that are transduced with the Pseudomonas phage Skulduggery (Table S2). Conclusion Conclusion In the present study, we assert that the phageome in the rhizosphere of A. fruticosum can be advantageous to the rhizobiome and the interacting plant, but can also be harmful because soil ARGs may spread to human clinical isolates through the food chain. We propose to study soil phageome at several long timescale to discover the possible frequency of new beneficial or detrimental genes, which can be packaged in the phageome of rhizospheric soil of this or other wild plant species through time. Diversity at the species level of the genus Streptomyces through time is also required to obtain information about the estimated time when new antibiotics may appear. In the present study, we assert that the phageome in the rhizosphere of A. fruticosum can be advantageous to the rhizobiome and the interacting plant, but can also be harmful because soil ARGs may spread to human clinical isolates through the food chain. We propose to study soil phageome at several long timescale to discover the possible frequency of new beneficial or detrimental genes, which can be packaged in the phageome of rhizospheric soil of this or other wild plant species through time. Diversity at the species level of the genus Streptomyces through time is also required to obtain information about the estimated time when new antibiotics may appear. Declaration of Competing Interest Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. References Supplementary material Supplementary material The following are the Supplementary data to this article:Supplementary Figs. S1–S4 The following are the Supplementary data to this article:Supplementary Figs. S1–S4 Supplementary Figs. S1–S4 Supplementary Figs. S1–S4 Supplementary Table S1 Supplementary Table S1 Supplementary Table S1 Supplementary Table S1 Supplementary Table S2 Supplementary Table S2 Supplementary Table S2 Supplementary Table S2 Supplementary Table S3 Supplementary Table S3 Supplementary Table S3 Supplementary Table S3 Supplementary Table S4 Supplementary Table S4 Supplementary Table S4 Supplementary Table S4 Supplementary Table S5 Supplementary Table S5 Supplementary Table S5 Supplementary Table S5 Supplementary Table S6 Supplementary Table S6 Supplementary Table S6 Supplementary Table S6 Supplementary Table S7 Supplementary Table S7 Supplementary Table S7 Supplementary Table S7 Supplementary Table S8 Supplementary Table S8 Supplementary Table S8 Supplementary Table S8 Supplementary Table S9 Supplementary Table S9 Supplementary Table S9 Supplementary Table S9 Supplementary Table S10 Supplementary Table S10 Supplementary Table S10 Supplementary Table S10 Supplementary Table S11 Supplementary Table S11 Supplementary Table S11 Supplementary Table S11 Supplementary Table S12 Supplementary Table S12 Supplementary Table S12 Supplementary Table S12 Supplementary Table S13 Supplementary Table S13 Supplementary Table S13 Supplementary Table S13 Supplementary Table S14 Supplementary Table S14 Supplementary Table S14 Supplementary Table S14 Supplementary Table S15 Supplementary Table S15 Supplementary Table S15 Supplementary Table S15 Supplementary Table S16 Supplementary Table S16 Supplementary Table S16 Supplementary Table S16 Supplementary Table S17 Supplementary Table S17 Supplementary Table S17 Supplementary Table S17 Supplementary Table S18 Supplementary Table S18 Supplementary Table S18 Supplementary Table S18 Data Availability Statement Data Availability Statement Supplemental data can be accessed at: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1bhrlqOFPqKgU19u0dDhsvTM75pFO8G6e?usp=sharing. Supplemental data can be accessed at: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1bhrlqOFPqKgU19u0dDhsvTM75pFO8G6e?usp=sharing. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sjbs.2023.103789.