Discussion It is unclear if cadmium acts as a carcinogen through genotoxic or epigenetic mechanisms. Whatever the basis, an important mechanism could be the disruption of signal transduction pathways resulting in aberrant cell accumulation. In this regard, the present study demonstrates that chronic cadmium-transformed prostate epithelial cells acquire generalized tolerance to chemically induced apoptosis. Disruption of apoptosis plays a major role in tumor formation and malignant progression. The activation of apoptosis is regulated by many different signals that originate from both intracellular and the extracellular sites (Vasilevskaya and O’Dwyer 2003). For example, the JNK signaling pathway has been implicated in the apoptotic response of cells exposed to stress. Several studies indicate that genotoxic stress induces translocation of stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK)/JNK to mitochondria (Kharbanda et al. 2000). Mitochondria are influenced by pro-apoptotic signal transduction through the JNK pathway, and the absence of JNK caused a defect in the mitochondrial death-signaling pathway, including the failure to release cytochrome c (Tournier et al. 2000). Therefore, JNK is required for stress-induced activation of the cyto-chrome c–mediated death pathway (Tournier et al. 2000). The results of the present study clearly demonstrate that JNK activation is perturbed in cadmium-transformed cells and that Ro318220, a strong activator of JNK, circumvents this apoptotic resistance. Therefore, cadmium-induced resistance to apoptosis appears to involve the specific suppression of the JNK pathways, which increases cell survival and decreases apoptosis (Vivo et al. 2003). In this regard, our prior work showed that after arsenite induced malignant transformation in vitro, generalized resistance to apoptosis develops, likely due to perturbation of the JNK pathway (Qu et al. 2002). In fact, these results are consistent with several reports that the stimulation of JNK is a prerequisite for cell apoptosis under various conditions, and a blockade of JNK activation results in the prevention of apoptosis (Verheij et al. 1996; Vivo et al. 2003; Xia et al. 1995). This blockade of apoptosis could be a key factor in cadmium carcinogenesis. There are many possible targets of the JNK signaling pathway that may affect the mitochondria, including members of the Bcl-2 group of apoptotic regulatory proteins (Tournier et al. 2000). It has been reported that the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 is phosphorylated and inactivated by JNK (Yamamoto et al. 1999). Bcl-2 disrupts a signaling cascade to the c-Jun N-terminal kinase activation induced by the apoptotic stresses (Park et al. 1997). However, the exact molecular mechanisms by which Bcl-2 prevents cell death remain unknown. It has been proposed that Bcl-2 might suppress cell death by modulating intracellular signaling cascades associated with apoptosis (Park et al. 1997). The cloning and characterization of the Bcl-2 oncogene established the importance of apoptosis in tumor development (Lowe and Lin 2000). For example, Bcl-2 promotes cell survival by blocking programmed cell death and disrupting normal proliferation (Hockenbery et al. 1990; McDonnell et al. 1989). It is recognized that Bcl-2 is expressed in a variety of human tumors. In particular, Bcl-2 overexpression is associated with prostate carcinoma (Herrmann et al. 1997). Conversely, Bax is a death promoter that is inactivated in certain types of cancer and plays critical roles in the initiation and execution of the apoptotic program (Putcha et al. 2003). The present study demonstrates that Bax protein levels were greatly reduced, and anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 expression markedly increased in CTPE cells as compared with RWPE-1 cells. Bcl-2:Bax ratio was approximately four times higher in CTPE cells than in control cells, which is consistent with perturbed apoptosis. The suppression of cell death could favor the development and progression of neoplasms by providing a selective survival advantage for transformed cells. Furthermore, upon investigation of a possible interplay between Bcl-2 and JNK1/2, we found the level of phosphorylated JNK1/2 was markedly decreased in a cadmium dose-dependent manner in Bcl-2–transfected cells. Also, cadmium- or etoposide-induced apoptosis was markedly reduced in Bcl-2–expressing cells compared with vector control cells. These data indicate that the intracellular signaling pathway for JNK stimulation is defective in Bcl-2–overexpressing cells, and Bcl-2 prevents both JNK signaling and cell death induced by various apoptotic stresses. The JNK signaling pathway might be downstream from the target of Bcl-2 action. Further study will be required to define precisely the interplay between JNK and Bcl-2. The anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family contain four homology domains, BH1, BH2, BH3, and BH4 (Janumyan et al. 2003). The five most closely related mammalian homologues are Bcl-2, Bcl-xL (Gene ID: 12048), Bcl-w (Gene ID: 12050), and Bax and Bak (Gene ID: 12018) (NCBI 2007). However, only the first three contain the N-terminal BH4 domain and inhibit apoptosis (Huang et al. 1998). BH1 and BH2 of Bax are critical for promoting cell survival, but Bax does not contain a region functionally equivalent to BH4 of Bcl-2 (Huang et al. 1998). To determine whether the BH4 region of Bcl-2 is essential for its anti-apoptotic function and regulation with JNK signal transduction pathway, we established a Bcl-2 Y21 mutant cell line by site-specific mutagenesis, which replaces the tyrosine with a serine at the 21st amino acid. Our results showed that Bcl-2–transfected cells were resistant to cadmium- or etoposide-induced apoptosis. Mutation of tyrosine at the 21st amino acid to serine resulted in loss of anti-apoptotic function that resulted in Bcl-2 Y21 mutant cells becoming as sensitive as vector control cells to apoptosis. Thus, the N-terminal BH4 domain is essential for the anti-apoptotic activity of Bcl-2, confirming previous published reports (Huang et al. 1998; Hunter et al. 1996). Most interestingly, our study showed that the level of phosphorylated JNK1/2 was markedly lower in Bcl-2–trans-fected cells than in vector control cells with cadmium treatment, but partially restored in Bcl-2 Y21 mutant cells. Taken together, these data suggest that the Bcl-2 BH4 domain is required for modulating JNK phosphorylation and anti-apoptotic function. In summary, after cadmium-induced malignant transformation has occurred in human prostate epithelial cells, transformed cells acquire resistance to apoptosis. The acquisition of apoptotic resistance appears to be linked to an increase in the anti-apoptotic action of Bcl-2 that perturbs the JNK signal transduction pathway. The Bcl-2 BH4 domain is required for modulating JNK phosphorylation and anti-apoptotic function. This acquired self-resistance to apoptosis may play an important role in cadmium-induced tumor initiation and progression.