Discussion Plant pathogenic bacteria inhabit a complex chemical environment, in which they are exposed to diverse antimicrobial compounds produced by both plants and competing microorganisms. In order to colonize plants and initiate disease, plant pathogens must elude these toxic effects. Efflux pumps are one of the tools shaped by evolution to counteract the hostile environment (Burse et al., 2004; Al-karablieh et al., 2009; Martinez et al., 2009; Vargas et al., 2011; Alvarez-Ortega et al., 2013). The AcrAB-TolC complex has a significant role in detoxicification of intracellular toxic metabolites, yet, other transporters also take part in protecting bacterial cells from antimicrobial compounds (Cudkowicz and Schuldiner, 2019). In the search for novel antibacterial mechanisms, the inhibition of AcrAB-TolC and the resulting accumulation of antimicrobial phytochemicals in the pathogen’s cell is suggested and evaluated here in a plant pathogen model. To this end, the efficacy of four known EPIs, i.e. berberine, NMP, PAβN and quinoline, was evaluated in Pb1692 cells by monitoring the decrease of MIC values of several concomitantly applied antimicrobial phytochemicals. This led to the identification of PAβN and NMP as the best EPIs. Interestingly, these same compounds also exhibited a synergistic effect upon their application together with two plant derived phytochemicals, Pht and Nar (
Table 2
). The latter are well recognized substrates of the AcrAB-TolC machinery, and their increased efficacy may have resulted from the increase of their intracellular concentrations. In E. coli, NMP was directly related to inhibition of AcrAB as demonstrated by reversed resistance to fluoroquinolones in an AcrAB overexpressor strain, and not in an AcrAB deficient mutant (Bohnert and Kern, 2005). The mode of action of NMP suggests that during pumping, NMP moves from the proximal to the distal pocket of AcrAB-TolC and straddles the G-loop instead of moving out. This interferes with normal substrate movement that may result in reversal of drug resistance (Li et al., 2015; Anes et al., 2019). In contrast with Pht and Nar, the MIC value of the antibiotic Cip was not modified by the application of either PAβN or NMP in Pb 1692 (
Table 1
), suggesting that the inhibitors did not impair Cip efflux from the cell. This may suggest that the inhibitors block the passage of Nar or Pht through the efflux pathway to a higher degree than the passage of the antibiotic. In drug resistant E. coli, the pump preferentially removes PAβN, while the antibiotic accumulates in the cell until the concentration is sufficient to impair the target’s activity. This mode of action allows in most cases to sensitize the bacteria, or completely reverse resistance to a given compound (Bolla et al., 2011). In order to elucidate a possible mechanism for the higher antimicrobial activity of some combinations rather than others (i.e. PAβN with Pht or Nar, and NMP with Nar), the potential existence of a feedback gene expression machinery in response to the application of both EPIs and of their combinations with the phytochemicals was studied. A 2.5 -fold increase of acrB expression was observed in Pb1692 following 2 h of exposure to 0.2 mM NMP (
Figures 4D
), while both acrA and tolC were not upregulated (
Figures 4A, B, E, F
). Application of PAβN did not upregulate the overexpression of acrB (
Figures 4C, D
), but upregulated acrA and tolC genes, by 3- and 2-fold respectively (
Figures 4B, F
). These results are in agreement with previous studies that have demonstrated in other bacteria different expression patterns of the three components of the EP in response to different EPIs (Grimsey et al., 2020; Kaur et al., 2021). Studying the feedback induced by non-growth-inhibiting concentrations of Pht and Nar revealed an early upregulation of the three components by both compounds at 15 min (first measurement point) post exposure. This up-regulation will contribute to the rapid excretion of these compounds from the cell and to increased bacterial resistance. The expression levels of acrB did not change when treated with Nar and Pht alone but the combination of NMP with Pht or Cip, and PAβN with Cip increased the expression of acrB (
Figure 4D
). Surprisingly, the application of PAβN induced downregulation in the expression of the acrB gene (
Figures 4C, D
), relative to each compound alone, suggesting a mechanism for their accumulation in the bacterial cells and the observed lower MIC values in the presence of the EPI. The direct effect of Pht and Nar on EP gene expression and its down-regulation with the inhibitors, support the interference of the EPIs with AcrAB-TolC competence to protect the cells against the phytochemicals. In contrast, Cip, alone or in combination with NMP and PAβN had no effect on the expression levels of acrA and TolC at 15 min and at 2 h (
Figures 4A, B, E, F
), whereas acrB was upregulated after 2 h (
Figure 4D
). This result together with the observed unchanging MIC values may suggest that the EP was still effective in eliminating the antibiotic from the cell. Recent studies reported on the plasticity and redundancy of efflux transporters in E. coli (Cudkowicz and Schuldiner, 2019), suggesting that other transporters may be involved, mainly in plant pathogenic bacteria (Zeng and Charkowski, 2021). Upregulation of acrB in response to Cip treatment was also reported in Salmonella enterica (Ferrari et al., 2013), and upon resistance to antibiotics in Enterobacter cloacae upon exposure to cefepime (Liu et al., 2018). The synergistic compounds combinations with FICI values of less than 0.5, i.e. Nar with either NMP or PAβN, and Pht with PAβN, induced a downregulation of acrB expression after 2 h (
Figure 4D
). Downregulation of acrAB-tolC is commonly observed with increased susceptibility to antibiotics (Li et al., 2011; Zhou et al., 2013; Dhara and Tripathi, 2020). Here, when the bacteria are more tolerant to the antimicrobial compounds, acrB is upregulated as with NMP, with Cip and Pht, and PAβN with Cip, which also displays higher FICI index (FICI > 0.5) (
Table 2
). Infection assays were conducted using potato tubers and calla lily leaves as hosts of Pb1692, and disease symptoms were recorded to verify that plants may indeed be better protected by the application of EPIs and selected phytochemicals. The results have demonstrated the efficacy of the EPIs together with recognized antimicrobial phytochemicals in attenuating disease development. Both NMP and PAβN potentiated Pht or Nar activities on two hosts (
Figure 5A, B, C
), at concentrations that did not inhibit cell growth. The potentiation by the EPIs was differential, depending on the substrate, maybe suggesting why plants produce so many antimicrobial compounds in response to pathogen attacks. Here again, Cip did not provide protection and was probably efficiently eliminated from the bacterial cells. The infection results were consistent with previous studies showing that inactivation of AcrAB-TolC or its homologues resulted in reduced disease severity in plants (Barabote et al., 2003; Burse et al., 2004; Maggiorani Valecillos et al., 2006; Brown et al., 2007; Al-karablieh et al., 2009; Vargas et al., 2011). Nonetheless, we may not rule out the involvement of additional mechanisms in response to the low phytochemicals concentrations, including the inhibition of additional EP, effects on membrane permeability, and QS interference. Finally, computational studies served to better infer how the application of EPIs may increase the efficacy of the selected phytochemicals and not of Cip. Similar studies have been recently employed by Kinana et al., 2016, to explain the behavior of PAβN and some of its analogs as substrates of the AcrB efflux pump in E. coli and as modulators of AcrB-induced nitrocefin efflux (Kinana et al., 2016). Yet, these studies primarily focused on the distal site whereas this work puts more emphasis on the proximal (access) site. In the absence of a crystal structure for Pb1692 AcrB, a homology model of the pump was first constructed based on the E. coli AcrB crystal structure. The remarkable similarity between the two structures supports the importance of these EP for bacterial fitness even under different lifestyles and environments. Next, docking of the four EPIs (berberine, NMP, PAβN and quinoline) to the homology model, suggested PAβN to be the best binder to both chains: A (proximal site) and C (distal site) of AcrB (
Table 3
). These results are in agreement with the quantitative EtBr accumulation assay (
Figure 1
). Finally, molecular docking suggested stronger binding of both Nar and Pht than of ciprofloxacin to the proximal site of the pump either in the absence or in the presence of PAβN (
Table 4
). Furthermore, the presence of PAβN slightly increases the predicted binding affinity of the two plant-derived compounds (as well as of Cip) to this site. This may suggest that the two phenolic compounds more effectively block the efflux pathway than the antibiotics in accord with their increased accumulation in the cell when applied in combination with the EPI PAβN. Interestingly, the presence of PAβN seems to reduce the affinity of the antibiotic to the distal site facilitating its removal from the cell. Looking at 
Table 4
, we do not see the same trend in the predicted binding affinities for the proximal and distal sites. While the two phytochemicals are predicted to be better binders than the antibiotic to the proximal site either in the absence or presence of PAβN, only Nar is predicted to be a better binder than Cip to the distal site. However, since the transport process requires sequential binding to the proximal, distal and extrusion site, we suggest that the trend observed for the proximal site is sufficient to explain the experimental results. The weaker interaction between AcrB and Cip in E. coli (Vargiu and Nikaido, 2012) and with tetracycline in Klebsiella pneumonia (Jamshidi et al., 2018) compared with PAβN has been reported, resulting in efflux of antibiotics through the transporter. Binding of PAβN to the hydrophobic pocket in AcrB causes an interference with the binding of other drug substrates similar to our findings (Vargiu and Nikaido, 2012; Jamshidi et al., 2018). In summary, inhibition of the AcrAB-TolC pump in Pb1692 by EPIs to prevent it from excreting phytochemicals from the cytoplasm to the periplasm and the external environment, may serve as a mean by which plants control bacterial pathogenicity. Thus, efflux pumps in Pb1692 and by extension, in other plant pathogenic bacteria, may serve as plausible targets for novel and sustainable anti-bacterial targets.