DISCUSSION With FunARTS, we automated target-directed genome mining methods for the fungal kingdom in a single workflow. Thereby, we enabled the search for potential targets of novel bioactive compounds and the prioritization of putative secondary metabolite gene clusters for their characterization. Previous tools have attempted the prioritization of fungal BGCs for their characterization based on a resistance gene approach. The FRIGG (Fungal Resistance Gene-directed Genome mining) pipeline using Python scripts, was tested on 51 Aspergillus and Penicillium genomes leading to the identification of 72 unique resistance gene families within BGCs (40). While FRIGGs successfully allowed for the prioritization of BGCs for their subsequent characterization, it requires the user to acquire extensive bioinformatic skills. In comparison to FRIGG, the reference set of FunARTS contains all 51 genomes available in FRIGG and more. They also have common structures, such as putative resistance genes and candidate proteins. Both methods obtained similar outcomes for the mycophenolic acid cluster and the fellutamide B cluster. However, FunARTS is the only easy-to-use web tool available at the moment. Besides the classic resistance-guided screening of known resistance models, additional criteria and tools have been included in FunARTS to assist in a rapid exploration of potential new targets. Although these criteria alone do not unequivocally represent resistance, they can highlight the enormous potential of specific fungal genomes as sources of promising bioactive compounds. Additionally, the interactive output page allows users to filter high numbers of positive hits quickly and easily. Moreover, multiple genomes can be analyzed, compared, and exported in a user-friendly way. Similarly, the BiG-SCAPE tool ensures that all detected BGCs are examined for similarity to each other. FunARTS aims to survey a wide scope of potential genes as drug targets while minimizing manual inspection by using dynamic outputs and multiple screening criteria for more confident target predictions. However, since high numbers of false positive hits are still possible, it is incumbent on the user to examine potential hits with provided metadata, contextual framing, and expert knowledge. Some of the FunARTS hits might be more likely involved in biosynthesis and not associated with resistance, it is currently not possible to automatically distinguish if genes are more likely involved in biosynthesis or resistance. We suggest focusing primarily on the proximity criterium and checking subsequently if the core gene present within the BGC is also duplicated in order to decrease false positive hits. In conclusion, FunARTS is a web server that allows BGC detection and novel target screening. In the future, we will work on adding new features such as the prediction of horizontal gene transfer (HGT) and phylogenetic screening. We also plan to update reference sets and existing models, such as known resistance factors. In this way, we aim to diversify the results of FunARTS by offering a wider range of applications. We have designed FunARTS to be open to new developments and to work with alternative models customized by users. Consequently, we hope to provide a more comprehensive approach to resistance-based genome mining methods in fungi to expedite the discovery of bioactive compounds.