Discussion In the experimental setup used in this study, the dynamics of a community structure of mixed bacteria was simulated in the 1-M colon model, whereas the dynamics of a Bifidobacterium dominated community (relative abundance >50%) was simulated in the 3-M colon model. These microbiota profiles have often been observed in feces from 1- to 3-month old infants in other studies (Borewicz et al., 2019). Our use of a dynamic in vitro gut model provides insight into the responses of these typical infant gut microbial ecosystems to amoxicillin/clavulanate exposure. Amoxicillin/clavulanate treatment decreased the diversity of microbiota, in accordance with a previous study on amoxicillin/clavulanate treated children (Mancabelli et al., 2021). The changes of microbiota composition due to amoxicillin/clavulanate were evidenced by variation in the relative abundance of enterobacteria, enterococci, clostridia, and bifidobacteria, next to a temporary decrease in the relative abundance of Bacteroides and Veillonella, similar to an in vivo study in infants treated with amoxicillin (Korpela et al., 2020). In both age groups, the exposure to amoxicillin/clavulanate induced a temporary shift to a community dominated by enterobacteria. Some members of gut microbiota are less sensitive to amoxicillin/clavulanate due to the ability to produce β-lactamases at levels exceeding the inhibitory effects of clavulanate, including Bacteroides and some genera within the Enterobacteriaceae family, such as Escherichia, Klebsiella, and Citrobacter (Nakano et al., 2011; Duytschaever et al., 2013). In addition, periplasmic β-lactamases of Gram-negative bacteria offer protection to individual cells, in contrast to the extracellular β-lactamases of Gram-positive bacteria that reduce the environmental concentration of β-lactam antibiotics (Livermore, 1997). Thus, this resistance mechanism, in relation with β-lactamases quantity and location, might explain the increase in the abundance of enterobacteria during antibiotic treatment. Although most intestinal Bifidobacterium spp. are sensitive to amoxicillin/clavulanate, specific strains of Bifidobacterium breve and Bifidobacterium longum were less sensitive to this antibiotic, where the presence of ABC transporter-encoding genes have been implicated to play a role in this observed insensitivity (Mancabelli et al., 2021), suggesting that variation in the level of resistance to amoxicillin/clavulanate was species/strain-specific. In the case of antibiotic-producing bacteria, the presence of an ABC transporter is important for the self-resistance mechanism by transporting the antibiotic through the cell membrane and preventing the antibiotic from entering the cell (Mendez and Salas, 2001). The use of amoxicillin/clavulanate also affected microbiota activity in both age groups, indicated by an increase of succinate and lactate production, while a decrease was seen in the production of propionate, butyrate, valerate, iso-butyrate, and iso-valerate, compared to the unexposed group. An increase in lactate was also seen in the gut microbiota of children treated with amoxicillin in another in vitro gut model (Le Blay et al., 2009). This increase of intermediate metabolites and the decrease of propionate might be due to the decrease in the abundance of lactate-utilizing propionate-producing bacteria, including Peptoniphilus, Veillonella, and Megasphaera (Louis et al., 2022). The importance of lactate-utilizing bacteria in the infant gut should not be underestimated as they play an important role in preventing accumulation of lactate and maintaining colonic health when they are in the right balance (Louis et al., 2022). On the other hand, a higher abundance of lactate-utilizing H2-producing bacteria, such as Veillonella and Eubacterium hallii, has been associated with infant colic, or excessive crying, as excess production of H2 seems to be responsible for bloating and cramping (Pham et al., 2017). Besides the increase of intermediate metabolites, low production of butyrate might be due to a variation in the abundance of butyrate-producing bacteria, including Peptoniphilus, Megasphaera, and endospore-forming bacteria such as Ruminococcus, Erysipelatoclostridium, and Clostridium (Appert et al., 2020). With respect to valerate, bacteria can produce this SCFA from ethanol and propionate or from amino acid fermentation by some Clostridium species (Buckel, 2001; Candry et al., 2020). In addition, Megasphaera isolated from the human gut also showed the ability to produce valerate (Shetty et al., 2013). The exposure of amoxicillin/clavulanate also decreased the production of BCFA compared to the unexposed group, indicating that the antibiotic also affected protein fermentation to a certain extent, due to variation in BCFA producers such as Bacteroides, Megasphaera, and Clostridium (Allison, 1978; Smith and Macfarlane, 1998). The influence of prebiotics on the resilience of microbiota structure and activity likely depends on the degrading capacity of the disturbed microbiota. Our data indicate that the supplementation of 2’-FL is beneficial in the recovery of the community characterized by mixed taxa in the 1-M colon model. Bifidobacterium and Bacteroides utilize 2’-FL to produce SCFA and lactate (Yu et al., 2013). In the absence of antibiotic, the fermentation of 2’-FL led to an increase in propanol and production of the SCFA acetate, propionate, and butyrate, as also seen previously in other in vitro gut models (Salli et al., 2019; Van den Abbeele et al., 2019, 2021; Natividad et al., 2022). In the antibiotic-exposed group, the supplementation of 2’-FL maintained the butyrate production and recuperated the production of propionate. Within bifidobacteria, the strategies for utilizing 2’-FL vary for different species and strains, with an intracellular digestion strategy by B. longum subsp. infantis and extracellular degradation by B. bifidum (Sakanaka et al., 2019). Fucose can be either used by B. infantis to produce 1,2-propanediol or excreted from the cell (Asakuma et al., 2011; Zabel et al., 2020). Moreover, extracellular degradation of 2’-FL by B. bifidum allows cross-feeding of fucose and galactose to other gut bacteria (Asakuma et al., 2011). Other gut bacteria are also able to utilize fucose from fucosylated sources, such as Ruminococcus gnavus that produce propanol and propionate when grown on 2’-FL, as demonstrated previously in an in vitro study (Crost et al., 2013). It is worth noting that intermediate metabolites such as 1,2-propanediol can be further utilized by gut bacteria to propanol and propionate. An increase in the detection of 1,2-propanediol in the lumen indicated that amoxicillin/clavulanate treatment affected the cross-feeding of this intermediate metabolite by inhibiting the 1,2-propanediol-utilizing bacteria, such as Lachnoclostridium, Lactobacillus, Veillonella, and Blautia (Louis and Flint, 2017). In one run of the antibiotic-exposed 3-M colon model, some traces of glucose, galactose, and lactose were detected in the lumen of 2’-FL supplemented experiment (3 AC-2FL), specifically when the community shifted to one dominated by enterobacteria, as such a community has previously been classified as 2’-FL slow-degrading microbiota (Salli et al., 2019). Cultivating a stable community of fecal-derived microbiota remains a challenge due to their complexity, hence resulting in some variation in microbiota composition among different runs. In particular, the differences seen within treatment group 3 AC-2FL might be explained by the possibility of reaching alternative (multiple) states of the community due to antibiotic perturbation in combination with niche selection from the supplementation of 2’-FL. In addition, the response of a complex ecosystem of microbes to a perturbation is not fully deterministic as the range of dynamic responses is partly stochastic or probabilistic. Therefore, the variation in responses between each run was seen even under the same well-controlled conditions, and hence the need for replication of each condition. In addition, an incomplete fermentation of GOS was seen in the antibiotic-treated group of both ages, indicated by the detection of glucose, galactose, and lactose in the lumen and traces of GOS in both the lumen and dialysis liquid, as previously seen in vitro in adult microbiota, which was strongly disturbed by amoxicillin (Ladirat et al., 2014b). To this end, our data indicate that the supplementation of GOS is beneficial for the recovery of the microbiota dominated by Bifidobacterium in the 3-M colon model. A lower level of monosaccharides and lactose in this group suggested that cross-feeding on GOS was still stimulated. In the presence of antibiotic, the supplementation of GOS in this age group maintained the production of acetate and butyrate, comparable to the treatment without antibiotic, as previously observed in another gut model (Salli et al., 2019). Several gut bacteria are able to utilize a broad range of GOS molecules, including Bifidobacterium, Bacteroides, and Lactobacillus (Böger et al., 2019b). Moreover, extracellular enzyme produced by gut bacteria, including endo-galactanase (Bifidobacterium breve and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron) and β-galactosidase (Bifidobacterium bifidum), allowing degradation and utilization of GOS with higher DP, but also allowing cross-feeding with other bacteria (Böger et al., 2019a,b). The use of a validated, dynamic in vitro gut model offered a well-controlled ecosystem that allowed a direct comparison between treatments. The TIM-2 colon model also provides the possibility in adding multiple pulses of antibiotic for studying the dynamic response of microbiota, which otherwise requires a difficult design to be conducted in in vitro batch systems. However, gas production was not measured in our study. This might give more insight into the potential overproduction of specific gasses due to antibiotic disturbance, such as H2. We also acknowledge the limitation in taxonomic classification below genus level (and family level for some bacterial groups), as the V4 region of 16S rRNA gene is highly similar or identical across multiple species. Furthermore, the use of individual feces might be of interest in evaluating possible individual responses to antibiotic disturbance or to prebiotic supplementation. Depending on the degree of perturbation, a prolonged fermentation period seems to be necessary to investigate a long-term impact of antibiotic treatment. To this end, the study described here used a relatively short-term antibiotic course and only one type of antibiotic as a model, thus additional research is needed to study the effect of the period and type of antibiotic on microbiota changes and the potential of prebiotics, or combinations thereof, to mitigate or restore any dysbiosis.