DISCUSSION Multiple regulatory genes coexist in lasalocid BGCs, but they may not form the complex coregulatory cascade process seen in the biosynthesis of monensin and nanchangmycin (13, 14). Our results reveal that lasalocid biosynthesis in different Streptomyces species is controlled by one variable and two conserved regulatory systems, providing an understanding of the regulatory diversification and mechanism. To our surprise, no intact homologs of lodR1–lodC were identified in the NCBI nucleotide database. The presence of this variable locus in Streptomyces sp. FXJ1.172 could be partially ascribed to the divergent evolution of the regulation of lasalocid biosynthesis among streptomycetes. The distant phylogenetic relationship between Streptomyces sp. FXJ1.172 and S. lasalocidi (96.2% 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity and 81.7% genome-wide average nucleotide identity) (24) and their disparate soil origins, red soil in China (25) and park soil in the United States (34), respectively, both support the divergent-evolution hypothesis. Nevertheless, more lasalocid BGCs are needed to reconstruct an evolutionary roadmap of the biosynthesis regulation of this polyether. The lsd2 gene, encoding a putative IclR family protein (23), might also have a regulatory role in lasalocid biosynthesis in S. lasalocidi ATCC 35851, albeit the whole sequence of lsd needs to be confirmed by genome sequencing. It was unexpected that the constitutive heterologous expression of lodA–lodC from Streptomyces sp. FXJ1.172 also resulted in the diminished production of lasalocid in S. lasalocidi ATCC 31180T. This result suggests that these ORFs exclusive to lod can play a general role in the regulation of lasalocid biosynthesis in different Streptomyces species. Although we attributed the undisturbed lasalocid production in the mutant strain 31180-R1ABC to the inhibition of lodA–lodC expression by LodR1, we cannot exclude another possibility, that all of these genes are not well expressed in the heterologous host, and more details are needed to further check whether the repression of the expression of lodA–lodC by LodR1 is functionally conserved in S. lasalocidi. Additionally, based on their proposed roles (Table 1), we presumed that lodA–lodC might be involved in the biosynthesis of an unknown molecule, which shares substrates with lasalocid biosynthesis, thus leading to the reduced production of lasalocid. However, no additional metabolites were detected in S. coelicolor M1146 or S. lasalocidi ATCC 31180T derivatives containing heterologously expressed lodA–lodC (data not shown). Notably, S. lasalocidi has only about 1/3 of LodC encoded within its lasalocid BGC, which keeps only a residue of the conserved domain found in LodC and thus looks like a truncated and useless protein (Table 1). Our further work will focus on functional analyses of lodA, lodB, and lodC to determine how much of the reduced lasalocid production in different strains is due to lodAB versus lodC and to uncover their repression mechanism in lasalocid biosynthesis. CSRs are often pathway-specific regulators that function as switches controlling the onset of antibiotic production (32). We used the consensus binding sequences found for LodR1 and LodR2 as queries for a local BLAST search against the genomes of Streptomyces sp. FXJ1.172 and S. lasalocidi ATCC 31180T, and we identified no other homologs. Thus, these regulators may not bind to the promoter regions of other genes, indicating that they tend to function as pathway-specific regulators instead of pleiotropic regulators. Nevertheless, antibiotics as well as their intermediates from the biosynthetic pathways can also modulate the activity of their cognate CSRs (35). This generates feedback regulation of antibiotic biosynthesis, which is important for self-protection against the overproduction of antibiotics (32, 36, 37). In this study, we demonstrate that lasalocid specifically binds to the MarR family transcription repressor LodR2 and causes its dissociation from the promoter region of lodR2–lodE (Fig. 5B), thus activating the transcription of lodE. This finding coincides with the defining feature of MarR family regulators: they normally respond to specific ligands, resulting in attenuated DNA-binding activity and often the derepression of target gene transcription (38). Recently, a polyether antibiotic, calcimycin, has also been proven to inhibit the DNA-binding activity of its cognate CSR CalR3, which subsequently initiates the expression of the calcimycin transporter-encoding gene calT (39). Our results further verify that polyether antibiotics can act as modulating ligands of their cognate CSRs, and more polyether ionophores should be used to test the ligand-binding specificity of LodR2 in future studies. The transporter LodE is also crucial for lasalocid biosynthesis because disruption of lodE results in reduced lasalocid production and an increased ratio of intracellular/extracellular lasalocid concentrations. It is noteworthy that the residual production of lasalocid in the ΔlodE mutant implies the existence of other efflux systems in the producer strain, as seen in the salinomycin producer Streptomyces albus BK3-25 (40). Intriguingly, the ΔlodE mutant has an intracellular level of lasalocid equivalent to that of FXJ1.172-WT at day 4 but exhibits a greatly reduced transcriptional profile (Fig. 3B and Fig. 5F). A possible explanation for these differences observed is as follows. Lasalocid acts as an ionophore antibiotic, which facilitates cation transport across plasma membranes. Although the intracellular concentration of the lodE mutant is similar to that of FXJ1.172-WT at day 4, there are still significant differences between the intracellular and extracellular lasalocid concentrations in the ΔlodE mutant. This may lead to the imbalance of ions across the membrane and subsequent cell damage. The cells may sense the changes in ion concentrations and thus downregulate the expression of lod to avoid self-damage. Additional transcriptome analysis will help to explain this confusing phenomenon that we observed. The distribution of highly similar homologs of lodR2–lodE in the other reported lasalocid BGCs highlights their indispensable role in the regulation of lasalocid biosynthesis. Furthermore, lodE homologs are also present in other polyether ionophore BGCs, i.e., idmC, monT, and ladT (with 67 to 69% nucleotide sequence identities to lodE) from the indanomycin, monensin, and laidlomycin (a monensin analog) gene clusters, respectively (31, 41, 42). Analogous to lodE coupled with lodR2, each of these homologous genes is flanked by a gene encoding a TetR/MarR family regulator (see Fig. S5 in the supplemental material). This observation indicates that similar regulatory systems may be widespread in different polyether producers. Hence, the disruption of these TetR/MarR family regulator-encoding genes or the overexpression of lodE homologs is potentially applicable for generating valuable polyether-overproducing mutants. The large ATP-binding regulators of the LuxR family (LALs) often serve as CSRs in secondary metabolite biosynthesis in Streptomyces (32). Recently, a LAL member named SlnR was identified as a positive pathway-specific regulator in Streptomyces albus for the biosynthesis of salinomycin, another marketed carboxylic polyether ionophore (11). Akin to how SlnR modulates salinomycin biosynthesis by activating the transcription of most of the structural genes, LodR3 is essential for the transcription of genes responsible for the formation of the lasalocid skeleton (Fig. 6B). Based on the results of gusA assays and cotranscriptional analyses, lodR3 may be dually controlled by itself and lodR2. The high sequence identity between lodR3 and las4 suggests the conserved role of this regulatory system in lasalocid biosynthesis, which is confirmed by the results of cross-complementation (Fig. 7B). Noticeably, both lodR3 and las4 contain rare TTA codons, suggesting that their expression may rely on the Streptomyces development-associated gene bldA, which encodes a tRNA for a rare leucine codon, UUA (43). Taken together, we propose a plausible regulatory model for lasalocid biosynthesis (Fig. 8). In the early stage of Streptomyces sp. FXJ1.172 growth, LodR2 specifically binds to the bidirectional promoter region between lodR2 and lodE, inhibiting the transcription of these two genes and part of lodR3. Meanwhile, lodR3 has a separate promoter of its own, and LodR3 can initiate the transcription of most structural genes, leading to the production of lasalocid. When lasalocid accumulates and reaches a certain threshold in the cells, its allosteric interaction with LodR2 induces a conformational change, causing the dissociation of LodR2 from the lodE promoter region. Subsequently, the strong expression of lodE, which encodes an antibiotic efflux pump, results in a drop in the intracellular lasalocid concentration and then the continuous production of lasalocid. Thus, with the LodR2–LodE system, the concentration of lasalocid in the producing strain is controlled at an appropriate level to avoid self-inhibition. Moreover, LodR1 positively regulates lasalocid biosynthesis by repressing the expression of adjacent lodA–lodC, which seems to serve as an alternative regulatory system in addition to the conserved LodR2-LodE and LodR3 systems. In addition, a previously neglected gene, lodQ (homologous to las7), was unexpectedly identified as a putative target gene of LodR3 in gusA transcriptional fusion assays (Fig. 6B). lodQ (las7) encodes a hypothetical protein with no proposed function in lasalocid biosynthesis. However, the disruption of las7 led to a remarkable decrease in lasalocid production in S. lasalocidi (Minghao Liu, Kairui Wang, and Ying Huang, unpublished data), implying an important role of lodQ/las7 in lasalocid biosynthesis. Thus, the detailed function of lodQ/las7 deserves further investigation. Based on our results, multiple genetic modifications can be performed to further improve lasalocid yields. These may include the overexpression of odR3 (las4 or lsd8), lodE (las2 or lsd5), and dasR-like positive pleiotropic regulatory genes in a ΔlodR2 (Δlas3 or Δlsd6–7) mutant. FIG 8Putative regulatory model for lasalocid production in Streptomyces. The lodR1–lodC locus found exclusively in Streptomyces sp. FXJ1.172 is highlighted in a light-gray background. Black arrows, activation; black bars, repression; dashed line, the mechanism of repressing lasalocid production needs to be further clarified. Putative regulatory model for lasalocid production in Streptomyces. The lodR1–lodC locus found exclusively in Streptomyces sp. FXJ1.172 is highlighted in a light-gray background. Black arrows, activation; black bars, repression; dashed line, the mechanism of repressing lasalocid production needs to be further clarified.