Discussion We used genetic, molecular biology and structural approaches to dissect the regulation of the streptococcal ARE ABC-F gene msrD. We characterized the msrDL regulatory ORF which induces ribosome stalling in the presence of cladinose-containing macrolides (Figs. 3, 4 and 6b). Our structural data shows that this inhibition results from the conjoint effects of: (i) MsrDL maintaining 23 S rRNA bases U2506 and U2585 in an uninduced conformation (Fig. 4f), (ii) the steric occlusion by U2584, U2585 and MsrDL residue F5 that precludes the productive accommodation of RF1 and RF2 (Figs. 3c and 4e). The MsrDL-stalled ribosome then hampers the formation of a RIT and thus allows for the transcription of msrD (Figs. 2c, 3a, 3c and 6b). The coupling between translation and transcription necessary for this mechanism in Streptococci is possibly mediated by a NusG-dependent RNAP pausing site in msrDL (Fig. 2c). Alongside ErmBL, ErmCL and ErmDL, MsrDL constitutes the fourth ERY-sensing NC that has been structurally described, however some mechanisms of drug-sensing and PTC silencing differ. Firstly, MsrDL and ErmCL need the presence of the C3 cladinose sugar of ERY for ribosomal stalling (Fig. 3a, b), this differs to ErmBL and ErmDL which induce stalling with drugs lacking this sugar such as oleandomycin, solithromycin or telithromycin12,14,66,72. Secondly, similar to ErmBL, no close contact between the drug and MsrDL was observed (Fig. 4h, i)66. Thirdly, MsrDL is the only described leader peptide that exploits inhibition of its hydrolysis by RFs to induce stalling in the presence of antibiotic, comparable to the metabolite sensors TnaC and SpeFL15,16. ErmBL13, ErmCL12 and ErmDL14 employ only elongation inhibition in physiological condition. Finally, MsrDL-NC conformation and path within the ribosome differ from previously described ligand-sensing leader peptides that elongate within the tunnel (Fig. 5b, c)12–16. It adopts a hook-like shape possibly due to hydrophobic interactions with the drug (Fig. 4b, g–i), while its initiating methionine engages in a dead-end crevice at the NPET entrance (Fig. 5). This crevice named “proximal crevice” is conserved in prokaryotes and eukaryotes (Supplementary Fig. 5f and 5g) and is a functional site within the ribosome. ARE ABC-F genes tend to be transcriptionally regulated as illustrated by msrD, vmlR, vgaA, lmo0919 and lmrC51,71,73–76. However, MsrD can regulate its own expression by creating a negative feedback-loop which is not the case for VmlR51. The gene msrD forms an operon with the efflux pump mefA (Fig. 1a), which is also regulated via ribosome-mediated transcriptional attenuation, translational stalling occurring on the mefAL33. Therefore, msrD is under the dual-regulation of two ERY-sensing leader peptides. One explanation for this redundancy may reside in the need for the bacteria to tightly regulate msrD because of its toxicity. The expression of msrDWT in E. coli DB10 led to a 20% growth defect compared to control condition (Fig. 1c), suggesting that msrDWT expression has a fitness cost for the bacteria and can be beneficial only in the presence of antibiotic. The presence of two attenuators creates a double-lock system to avoid any basal expression in the absence of inducer and the negative feedback-loop maintains a minimal amount of MsrD production. Thus, as long as MefA can export enough antibiotic to provide resistance, msrD should be kept repressed. The fitness cost of the expression of ARE ABC-F genes is a potential Achilles heel of the bacteria containing those genes and may be exploited to fight antibiotic resistance. MsrD provides resistance to ERY, AZY and TEL23 (Table 1), but only the first two induce its expression, indicating that MsrD can provide some resistance for an antibiotic which does not induce its expression. Thus, MsrDL facilitates the use of MsrD by the bacteria and maintains its evolution under its control.