4. Discussion In this study, both phylogenetic trees based on 16S rRNA gene sequences and whole-genome sequences (Figure 1 and Figure 2) revealed that strain 21So2-11 had a unique taxonomic position within the genus Streptomyces. Further genome comparisons based on ANI and dDDH confirmed that strain 21So2-11 is a potential novel Streptomyces species due to the fact that its similarity values with the closest type strains within the same genus were less than the thresholds for species definition. Thus, this actinomycete can likely be considered a new source for the discovery of novel secondary metabolites because of the well-known potential of Streptomyces in drug development [4,7]. A comprehensive evaluation of the genome of strain 21So2-11 revealed that the bacterium contained a large number of genes related to cold adaptation (e.g., cold-shock protein- and RNA helicase-related genes) and UV resistance (e.g., DNA damage repair-related genes) (Table S2), which are helpful for adapting to harsh Antarctic conditions such as low temperature and strong UV radiation [53,54]. The halotolerance (e.g., salt tolerance- and membrane transport-related genes) of strain 21So2-11, which was isolated from terrestrial soils, was an unexpected result. In fact, halotolerant Streptomyces strains have reportedly been isolated from terrestrial environments, including Antarctic soil [55,56]. A gene cluster responsible for ectoine synthesis was also detected in strain 21So2-11 (Table S3). As a main compatible solute, ectoine is beneficial for bacterial cells not only as an osmoregulatory solute but also as a protectant of cells by mitigating the detrimental effects of freezing, drying, UV radiation and cytotoxins [57]. Notably, most (83.0%) of the investigated Streptomyces strains isolated from various polar environments, including Arctic and Antarctic soils, Arctic and Antarctic sediments and Southern Ocean seawater, have been observed to contain ectoine and melanin-related BGCs with high similarity (Figure 5 and Figure 6), suggesting that the ectoine and melanin-related BGCs are core BGCs in polar Streptomyces species. In Streptomyces species, melanin is involved in virulence factors as well as in protection mechanisms against UV radiation and oxidative agents [58]. In addition, strain 21So2-11 contained a gene cluster responsible for synthesizing desferrioxamine, a siderophore that can be beneficial for the growth and development of Streptomyces [59]. The strain also contained a gene cluster responsible for the synthesis of SapB, a morphogenetic peptide important for the formation of aerial mycelia in Streptomyces [60]. These genes and gene clusters provide insight into the environmental adaptation and cell growth of Streptomyces sp. 21So2-11 inhabiting Antarctic soil. Microorganisms have developed different strategies to prevent self-toxicity because they must be resistant to the biological effects of bioactive compounds to survive during natural product production/accumulation [61]. As the function of bacterial defense against self-toxicity is intimately linked to virulence factors and antibiotic resistance genes [62,63], abundant pathogenic and virulence-related genes as well as antibiotic resistance genes found in the 21So2-11 genome can contribute to preventing the self-toxicity of bacteria caused by secondary metabolites, including auroramycin, capreomycin, enteromycin, gaudimycin, leucomycin, naphthomycin, neomediomycin, streptolydigin and kinamycin. At the same time, these virulence factors and antibiotic resistance genes can provide strain 21So2-11 with an advantage in competing with organisms inhabiting the same habitat, especially those that are sensitive to the antibiotics produced by strain 21So2-11. In addition, four BGCs (i.e., Cluster Nos. 1.1, 4.3, 9.4 and 16.1; Table S3) in 21So2-11 showed no similarity to known gene clusters according to antiSMASH, indicating that these BGCs can contribute to the production of novel secondary metabolites by polar Streptomyces species. Two BGCs related to naphthomycin and gaudimycin biosynthesis in strain 21So2-11 showed more than 50% similarity to known antibiotics. Naphthomycins are 29-membered naphthalenic ansamacrolactam antibiotics with antimicrobial and antineoplastic activities [48]. These antibiotics can act as fatty acid synthase inhibitors and have better inhibitory effects on both Gram-positive bacteria and fungi [64]. Naphthomycin also has antineoplastic activity by inhibiting various SH enzymes, particularly those involved in nucleic acid synthesis [65]. Angucyclines are a specific group of aromatic polyketides that are associated with various biological activities (e.g., antimicrobial and antitumor activities) and are mainly produced by soil-dwelling Streptomyces bacteria [66]. They can act as topoisomerase inhibitors by targeting bacterial and eukaryotic topoisomerase [67]. Through a cascade of oxidation/reduction reactions, the novel angucycline metabolite gaudimycin can be generated [49,68]. Abundant secondary metabolite BGCs (1456 BGCs) responsible for diverse known and/or novel secondary metabolites (48 secondary metabolite categories) were detected in the genomes of 47 investigated Streptomyces bacteria isolated from Arctic and Antarctic environments. These secondary metabolites, including ectoines, lanthipeptides, melanins, NRPSs, siderophores, terpenes, T1PKSs, T2PKSs and T3PKSs, have diverse chemical structures and various biological activities (e.g., antitumor and antibacterial activities), supporting their potential in drug development. Among the 1456 putative secondary metabolite BGCs, there were 162 unknown BGCs, accounting for 11.2% of the total BGCs. The four most abundant unknown BGCs were related to PKSs, NRPSs, terpenes and lanthipeptides, accounting for 19.1%, 18.0%, 14.8% and 8.6% of the total unknown BGCs, respectively. At the same time, high diversity was observed in the main putative secondary metabolites in the 47 polar Streptomyces strains based on genome mining. For example, the melanin family was divided into eight independent clades that have four groups and four individual types (Figure 6). In addition, the hopene family was composed of five groups and three individual types. Gene loss and horizontal gene transfer often lead to a highly variable distribution of BGCs in the Streptomyces genome, which allows them to lose or acquire BGCs in response to selective pressures [69]. Our results indicate that Streptomyces bacteria inhabiting polar regions are potentially valuable sources for identifying novel secondary metabolites. Similarity network analysis clearly revealed that ten BGCs responsible for secondary metabolites, including capreomycin, hiroshidine, K-252a, leucomycin, naphthomycin, neomediomycin and four unknown materials, were exclusively detected in strain 21So2-11 (Figure 6), indicating the potential of this novel bacterial strain for the discovery of novel drug leads. Moreover, the results showed that this approach can complement antiSMASH analysis to provide a deeper insight into the biosynthetic potential of a given strain. Based on similarity network analysis, BGCs responsible for coelichelin, SapB, tylactone, enteromycin, vazabitide and streptolydigin were found in the Antarctic Streptomyces strains, whereas no secondary metabolite BGC was exclusively detected in the Arctic Streptomyces strains. Whether Antarctic actinomycetes can provide more chances to find known and/or novel natural products compared to Arctic bacteria should receive more attention in future research. In the postgenome mining era, the continuously increasing number of Streptomyces genome sequences has provided invaluable genetic resources for the discovery of novel secondary metabolites with interesting biological activities [2]. However, most secondary metabolite BGCs in Streptomyces are silent or poorly expressed under laboratory culture conditions, limiting the effective use of Streptomyces bacteria [2,70]. Thus, the activation of silent secondary metabolite BGCs, including the expression of related functional genes and the regulation of biosynthetic pathways, is important for successfully isolating bioactive secondary metabolites from Streptomyces strains. Diverse methods have been applied to activate silent secondary metabolite BGCs, including culture media modifications, chemical or antibiotic treatments, co-cultivation and one strain many compounds method (OSMAC) [11,71]. However, these untargeted methods usually resulted in non-directed activation of silent secondary metabolite BGCs in Streptomyces [2]. Synthetic biology approaches including promoter replacement, overexpression or repression of regulatory genes, heterologous expression in different hosts and refactoring of targeted BGCs have been implemented for specific activation of target secondary metabolite BGCs. Over the last decade, synthetic biology has emerged as a powerful tool to facilitate natural product discovery via optimization of secondary metabolite production and activation of target silent BGCs in Streptomyces [2,11]. Synthetic biology strategies including engineering of original host genome and heterologous expression in chassis strains should be considered for expanding the productivity and diversity of available novel secondary metabolites from polar Streptomyces strains.