Discussion Aminoglycosides antibiotics were previously shown to be efficient antiphage agents in widely divergent bacterial hosts (Kever et al. 2022). However, a pivotal question emerged from this discovery: how does antibiotic resistance impact the antiviral capabilities of aminoglycosides? Resistance within this versatile antibiotic class predominantly arises through modifications either to the drug itself or to the bacterial target (16S rRNA). In this study, we screened a broad portfolio of aminoglycosides and resistance genes to evaluate the potential uncoupling of the dual functionality via antibacterial resistance. Regardless of the use of target site or drug modification, all tested resistance mechanisms ensure bacterial growth under infection conditions by retaining the antiphage mode and abolishing the antibacterial mode of action, as exemplified by the virulent phage Alderaan and the temperate phage λ. As recently demonstrated by Pradier and Bedhomme (2023), aminoglycoside-resistance genes are widely distributed among all biomes, with the soil playing a pivotal role in AME gene transfer events. Natural ecosystems are considered to harbor a reservoir of antibiotic resistances genes, stemming from both, anthropogenic transfer of antibiotics and resistance genes as well as the presence of natural aminoglycoside producers such as Streptomyces and Micromonospora spp. residing in soil (Tripathi and Cytryn 2017, Durand et al. 2019). Gene transfer events are facilitated by the frequent localization of such resistance genes on mobile genetic elements, allowing broadening of the resistance spectrum (Pradier and Bedhomme 2023). Given the molecular versatility of aminoglycosides confirmed in this study, the acquisition of resistance becomes not only advantageous as defense against the chemical warfare exerted by the secretion of aminoglycosides, but could ensure concurrent protection from phages as already discussed in our previous review article (Hardy et al. 2023). The prevalence of aminoglycoside-resistant bacteria in natural habitats puts further emphasis on the ecological significance of such chemical antiphage defense. However, taken into account the predominance of subinhibitory antibiotic concentrations and the existence of local extremes in the soil environment (Fajardo et al. 2009), one can infer that such community-wide antiphage defense is constrained to mutualistic interactions within the genetic kin or between different species. The latter is thought to be facilitated by increased horizontal gene transfer events of aminoglycoside resistance genes in the presence of low antibiotic concentrations (Cairns et al. 2018). Overall, this would add to the notion of the pan-immune system describing antiphage defense as a shared community resource (Bernheim and Sorek 2020). An additional aspect, which reinforces the role of aminoglycosides as “public goods” in antiphage defense, is the natural growth phenotype as well as the temporal onset and organization of antibiotic production in Streptomyces spp. These multicellular growing microorganisms are characterized by a complex developmental program, starting with the germination of a spore and the establishment of a vegetative mycelium, which further develops into aerial hyphae and spores upon nutrient depletion (Bush et al. 2015, Schlimpert and Elliot 2023). Antibiotic production is typically linked to the morphological differentiation to aerial mycelium in order to protect released nutrients of sacrificed mycelial parts from other terrestrial competitors (Bibb 2005, van der Meij et al. 2017). To enhance colony-wide fitness, this antibiotic production can be coordinated by a division of labor, involving the differentiation into an altruistic subpopulation specialized in antibiotic production (Zhang et al. 2020, Zhang et al. 2022), which in turn is facilitated by the genomic instability of Streptomyces at the chromosomal arms (Bentley et al. 2002, Thibessard and Leblond 2014). Given the clonal nature of the Streptomyces colonies, secretion of aminoglycosides might play a pivotal role in shielding susceptible segments of the colony against both bacterial competitors and phage predation. In addition to the ecological relevance, this study provides structural insights into the antiphage effect of these compounds. According to assays with the different S. tenebrarius mutant strains and purified apramycin biosynthetic intermediates, the antiphage effect occurred at a late step of the biosynthetic pathway (Fig. 3). This could be due to either differences in the intracellular interaction with phage amplification or in the uptake of the respective molecules. Modification via acetylation or phosphorylation reduces the amount of positively charged amino groups at neutral pH or even adds a negative charge to the cationic aminoglycosides, which could affect their interaction with the negatively charged components of the bacterial surface for uptake (Taber et al. 1987). In the case of the in vitro acetylated apramycin, the interference with phage infection was less pronounced in the early stages of infection, but comparable to the in vivo modification in the long-term, supporting the hypothesis of a reduced uptake of the molecules when modified in vitro. The same could apply to the phosphorylated apramycin accumulating in the ΔaprZ mutant, possibly explaining the delayed phage-inhibiting effect. These considerations highlight the importance of discriminating between differences in molecule uptake and a potential antiphage property exerted at the intracellular level (Kever et al. 2022). As discussed previously, investigations into the mechanism of action suggest that the inhibition of phage infection occurs early, between the injection and replication stages. While the precise molecular target remains unclear, it may involve direct targeting of the injected, yet unreplicated, phage DNA and/or interference with the phage DNA injection process (Kever et al. 2022). Aminoglycosides are known to bind to the bacterial cell membrane and subsequently accumulate within the cell via electron-transport mediated processes, EDPI and EDPII (Krause et al. 2016). Using fluorescently labeled antibiotics, the membrane-bound and EDPII elements were shown to constitute a substantial proportion of the overall fluorescence levels tightly bound to E. coli cells (Sabeti Azad et al. 2020). In cells expressing resistance genes, one could reasonably expect to predominantly encounter the membrane-bound fraction of aminoglycosides. This anticipation stems from the premise that the disruption of membrane integrity and the subsequent diffusive entry of the drug, typically induced by mistranslated proteins during EDPII, might not occur in the presence of resistance mechanisms. While the acquisition of aminoglycoside resistance holds several advantages for bacteria, it poses a drawback for antibiotic–phage combinatory treatments (Jiang et al. 2020, Zuo et al. 2021). Although the clinical use of aminoglycosides declined with the introduction of other classes of antibiotics such as cephalosporins or fluoroquinolones, the global spread of multidrug-resistant pathogens has led to a renewed demand for this class of antibiotics, frequently for combinatory treatments (Krause et al. 2016). Moreover, increasing knowledge about modifications overcoming aminoglycoside-resistance allows design of semisynthetic antibiotics, thereby improving the therapeutic window of aminoglycosides to combat this global health issue (Krause et al. 2016, Serio et al. 2018, Zárate et al. 2018). However, attention should be paid to the preselection of phages for antibiotic–phage combinatory treatments to avoid antagonistic effects. Antiphage activities of aminoglycosides were observed in the background of diverse aminoglycoside resistance genes tested in this study. In conclusion, this study emphasizes the ecological relevance of natural aminoglycoside secretion for a community-wide defense against phages. Moreover, it sheds light on crucial considerations for the integration of phage–antibiotic combinatory treatments in the context of clinical infections.