RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Polyether ionophores are effective across a panel of Staphylococcus aureus strains from bloodstream infections. To immediately establish clinical relevance for investigating ionophores as antibacterial compounds against Staphylococcus aureus, we determined the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and the minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) for several natural product ionophores against both methicillin-sensitive (MSSA) and methicillin-resistant (MRSA) S. aureus clinical isolates (Fig. 1, Table S4). Two observations stand out from these experiments: (i) all ionophores were equally effective across all tested strains, and (ii) all ionophores had a large difference between relatively low MIC values and MBC values that were not measurable in the tested range, making the compounds bacteriostatic. A similar activity profile was observed with the vancomycin control. The only exception was calcimycin, a structurally atypical polyether ionophore (16). FIG 1Polyether ionophore bioactivity in methicillin-sensitive (MSSA) and methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) strains. Polyether S. aureus isolates from bloodstream infections were obtained from Aarhus University Hospital (AUH), Denmark. Five methicillin-sensitive S. aureus strains (A) and three MRSA strains (B) were obtained, and bioactivity was determined using MIC and MBC analyses in a defined minimal medium M9 (CM-M9). All results are listed as the obtained concentration ranges (μg/mL) of at least two biological repetitions, each with technical triplicates (distinct wells). Polyether ionophore bioactivity in methicillin-sensitive (MSSA) and methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) strains. Polyether S. aureus isolates from bloodstream infections were obtained from Aarhus University Hospital (AUH), Denmark. Five methicillin-sensitive S. aureus strains (A) and three MRSA strains (B) were obtained, and bioactivity was determined using MIC and MBC analyses in a defined minimal medium M9 (CM-M9). All results are listed as the obtained concentration ranges (μg/mL) of at least two biological repetitions, each with technical triplicates (distinct wells). We conducted these experiments in a defined minimal medium CM-M9 (M9 salts with Ca2+ and Mg2+ adjusted to physiological levels) and, serendipitously, noticed a large discrepancy between these values and those previously reported using type strains in Lysogeny broth (LB) (15). Due to the rather broad mechanistic role of polyether antibiotics as ion transporters, we suspected that the medium composition might play a significant role. Consequently, we determined the MIC values of our polyether ionophore panel in a small set of commonly used media: Lysogeny broth, Mueller-Hinton broth (MHB), cation-adjusted MHB (CA-MHB), and the defined minimal medium M9 (CM-M9) (see Fig. 2). Compared to vancomycin, whose activity varied from 0.5 to 4 μg/mL depending on the medium composition (maximum 8-fold change), some of the ionophores appeared more sensitive to change (more than 8-fold). Apart from maduramycin and nanchangmycin, the ionophores had the lowest MIC value in LB and the highest in CM-M9. A similar trend has been reported for calcimycin and ionomycin against Bacillus subtilis (17). We also determined the MIC in MHB supplemented with sodium bicarbonate (25 mM) to approach more clinically relevant screening conditions because supplementation with sodium bicarbonate has been shown to improve the in vitro to in vivo translatability of MHB (6). The MIC values mirrored those determined for the CM-M9 medium. Because the chemically defined CM-M9 allows much better control over concentration of individual cations we chose to proceed with this medium in the subsequent experiments. FIG 2MIC of polyether ionophores in S. aureus in the presence of different growth media. MIC determination was performed in technical triplicates and biological replicates in 96-well plates in accordance with CLSI recommendations. MIC of polyether ionophores in S. aureus in the presence of different growth media. MIC determination was performed in technical triplicates and biological replicates in 96-well plates in accordance with CLSI recommendations. The antibiotic properties of ionophores are affected by cation concentration. Based on the ionophores’ fluctuation in inhibitory potency observed between different media and their general role in ion transport, we hypothesized that cation concentrations would modulate their activity. This prompted us to systematically investigate the effect of changing the concentrations of Na+, K+, Mg2+, and Ca2+ in a full factorial design. Experimentally, the cation concentrations were set to vary within physiologically relevant ranges in a CM-M9-based medium. The ranges were set as follows: Na+, 65 to 125 mM; K+, 5 to 25 mM; Mg2+, 0.05 to 2 mM; and Ca2+, 0.1 to 2.5 mM; and we used growth as the response variable upon challenge with ionophores at 0.25×, 1×, or 4× MIC (Fig. 3A). To validate the experimental setup, we also tested daptomycin, which should exhibit calcium dependence, and vancomycin, which we did not expect to be influenced by changes in cation concentration within the set ranges. Indeed, daptomycin was potentiated with increasing calcium concentration and, to a lesser extent, increasing magnesium concentration. Vancomycin inhibition showed a slight inverse correlation with sodium concentration, but generally negligible cation dependency, as expected (Fig. 3A). Compared to that of daptomycin, the ionophores’ inhibitory effects were generally less impacted by changing cation concentrations and fell into two broad groups: calcimycin and ionomycin inhibition correlated with increasing calcium concentrations and, interestingly, with decreasing magnesium concentrations, whereas lasalocid, salinomycin, narasin, and maduramycin inhibition correlated with increasing sodium and decreasing potassium concentrations. Calcimycin has also been reported to drastically lower the tolerated amount of added iron, manganese, and calcium to B. subtilis (17). These data largely reflect the affinity toward either monovalent (salinomycin, monensin, narasin) or divalent cations (calcimycin, ionomycin) that have been historically reported (18), although it is also clear that each compound has a unique profile. FIG 3Cation dependency of polyether ionophores. (A) A full factorial design of experiment (DOE)-approach was used to study how ionophore activity depends on cation concentrations (Na+, K+, Ca2+, and Mg2+). The concentrations of the four cations were chosen as factors, and the percentage change in growth compared to a control as the response. S. aureus was treated with the compounds at 0.25× MIC (1× MIC for daptomycin) in the presence of cations in the concentration ranges listed in the figure. Bacterial growth was evaluated after overnight treatment, and MODDE Pro was used for data processing. Daptomycin and vancomycin were included as positive and negative controls, respectively. Results are average of technical triplicates. (B) Ionophore effects on membrane potential were studied using the membrane-potential sensitive dye 3,3-dipropylthiacarbocyanine iodide [DiSC3(5)]. S. aureus was loaded with 1 μM DiSC3(5) (1%), and after the dye had stabilized, the culture was treated with 10× MIC (CM-M9 medium). Valinomycin (20 μg/mL) and nigericin (10 μg/mL) were included as positive and negative controls, respectively. Results are average of technical triplicates (distinct wells), and bars are means ± SD (standard deviation) (n = 3). Cation dependency of polyether ionophores. (A) A full factorial design of experiment (DOE)-approach was used to study how ionophore activity depends on cation concentrations (Na+, K+, Ca2+, and Mg2+). The concentrations of the four cations were chosen as factors, and the percentage change in growth compared to a control as the response. S. aureus was treated with the compounds at 0.25× MIC (1× MIC for daptomycin) in the presence of cations in the concentration ranges listed in the figure. Bacterial growth was evaluated after overnight treatment, and MODDE Pro was used for data processing. Daptomycin and vancomycin were included as positive and negative controls, respectively. Results are average of technical triplicates. (B) Ionophore effects on membrane potential were studied using the membrane-potential sensitive dye 3,3-dipropylthiacarbocyanine iodide [DiSC3(5)]. S. aureus was loaded with 1 μM DiSC3(5) (1%), and after the dye had stabilized, the culture was treated with 10× MIC (CM-M9 medium). Valinomycin (20 μg/mL) and nigericin (10 μg/mL) were included as positive and negative controls, respectively. Results are average of technical triplicates (distinct wells), and bars are means ± SD (standard deviation) (n = 3). As a consequence of their dual ion-transport and membrane-binding activities, polyether ionophores may acutely disrupt cellular membrane potential. This effect could be the cause of both their anti-bacterial and cytotoxic effects. To probe the effect of ionophores on membrane potential, we used the dye 3,3-dipropylthiacarbocyanine iodide [DiSC3(5)]. DiSC3(5) aggregates within the bacterial membrane, causing self-quenching of its fluorescence; however, upon disruption of the membrane electrical potential (ΔΨ), the dye is released into the medium, accompanied by an increase in fluorescence intensity. We tested eight naturally occurring polyether ionophores at 10× MIC in this setup (Fig. 3B). As a positive control, we used the pore-forming K+ ionophore valinomycin, which is known to dissipate the ΔΨ. Compared to valinomycin, the polyether ionophores did not dissipate ΔΨ, as the fluorescence intensity remained stable for 60 min (Fig. 3B). Only calcimycin caused a slight increase in fluorescence intensity, although much less than valinomycin. Work by Farha et al. (19) has shown that DiSC3(5) can indirectly probe the proton gradient (ΔpH) across the membrane because bacteria respond to a decreasing ΔpH by increasing ΔΨ, thereby leading to decreased fluorescence readout by DiSc3(5). The latter effect was reported previously for nigericin, but we did not observe any significant response for the ionophores tested here. In conclusion, our data indicate that the ionophores do not disrupt the membrane potential in any significant way. Another study by Farha et al.(7) showed that the drastic changes in antibiotic potency at increased sodium bicarbonate levels are caused by a selective dissipation of the ΔpH. They also showed that dissipators of ΔΨ (valinomycin, I1, I2, and I3) act synergistically with bicarbonate. If the ionophores did in fact function as potent dissipators of membrane potential, we should see a more pronounced effect on the measured MIC values when adding bicarbonate. Selected polyether ionophores kill bacterial persisters and biofilms. We next investigated antibacterial effects beyond simple early exponential growth. Two of the most substantial clinical challenges related to infections are the formation of biofilms and persister cells, both of which are primary causes of chronic and recurrent infections (20–23). Upon antibiotic treatment, bacterial cells can transform into metabolically inactive persister cells, making them highly resilient to treatment and allowing them to “escape” the antibiotic (Fig. 4A). When antibiotic treatment is discontinued, the persister cells eventually transition back into metabolically active cells, creating recurrent infections. Biofilms, which typically grow on surfaces of medical implants or host tissue, are characterized by increased tolerance to antibiotic treatment. This increased tolerance is attributed to a lower growth rate, decreased antibiotic diffusion, higher oxidative stress tolerance, and a larger subpopulation of persister cells (Fig. 4A) (21). To investigate the effects of polyether ionophores on metabolically inactive persister cells, we used a recently developed high-throughput method which screens the ability to kill non-growing cells by performing the test without a carbon source (24). In short, we transferred S. aureus cells to CM-M9 medium with the carbon source omitted—preventing any growth and mimicking the subpopulation left after antibiotic treatment—and incubated them with antibiotics for 24 h before determining the viable cell count. We used ciprofloxacin (50 μg/mL) as the negative control (no inhibitory activity against persister cells) and the DNA-cross-linker mitomycin C (40 μg/mL) as the positive control for killing persister cells. When tested at 50× MIC, the ionophores displayed very different inhibitory potential in this context (Fig. 4B). While most compounds were completely inactive, calcimycin showed a modest effect on the persister cells at 50× MIC, but lasalocid showed a concentration-dependent inhibitory effect on the persister cells and a remarkable potency at >75 μg/mL. Next, using a 96-well assay based on peg-lids, we determined the minimum biofilm inhibition concentration (MBIC) and minimum biofilm eradication concentration (MBEC) for the ionophores (Fig. 4D). For most of the compounds, the MBIC mirrored the MIC. The MBECs of most of the compounds were very high, which is in agreement with a previous report on S. aureus on some of these ionophores (25). However, lasalocid, nanchangmycin, and calcimycin stood out with promising MBEC values similar to their MBC, indicating that under these test conditions, the biofilm matrix and the persister phenotype in these biofilms do not sufficiently protect the bacteria against the antimicrobial action of the ionophores; however, the proximate cause of this is still unclear. FIG 4Polyether ionophore action on S. aureus persister cells and biofilms. (A) Illustration showing the lack of antibiotic effect against persister and biofilm cells. (B) Persister cell killing with 50× MIC (the respective concentrations are listed in the figure). Persister cells were produced by transferring growing, susceptible bacteria into a modified CM-M9 medium without available carbon sources. Persister cells reverted to susceptible cells when transferred into a nutrient-rich medium (susceptible cells t = 24). Ciprofloxacin (50 μg/mL) and mitomycin C (40 μg/mL) were included as negative and positive controls, respectively. Bars are mean ± SD (n = 9). (C) Persister cell killing with lasalocid at 5×, 10×, 25×, and 50× MIC. Bars are means ± SD (n = 9). (D) Biofilm inhibition and eradication. A S. aureus biofilm was grown for 24 h before antibiotic treatment. Minimum biofilm inhibition concentration (MBIC) was determined after 24 h of treatment, and minimum biofilm eradication concentration (MBEC) was determined after 72 h of biofilm recovery. Lasalocid (red) and calcimycin (blue) are highlighted for clarity. All results shown are averages of biological triplicates, each with technical triplicates. Polyether ionophore action on S. aureus persister cells and biofilms. (A) Illustration showing the lack of antibiotic effect against persister and biofilm cells. (B) Persister cell killing with 50× MIC (the respective concentrations are listed in the figure). Persister cells were produced by transferring growing, susceptible bacteria into a modified CM-M9 medium without available carbon sources. Persister cells reverted to susceptible cells when transferred into a nutrient-rich medium (susceptible cells t = 24). Ciprofloxacin (50 μg/mL) and mitomycin C (40 μg/mL) were included as negative and positive controls, respectively. Bars are mean ± SD (n = 9). (C) Persister cell killing with lasalocid at 5×, 10×, 25×, and 50× MIC. Bars are means ± SD (n = 9). (D) Biofilm inhibition and eradication. A S. aureus biofilm was grown for 24 h before antibiotic treatment. Minimum biofilm inhibition concentration (MBIC) was determined after 24 h of treatment, and minimum biofilm eradication concentration (MBEC) was determined after 72 h of biofilm recovery. Lasalocid (red) and calcimycin (blue) are highlighted for clarity. All results shown are averages of biological triplicates, each with technical triplicates. Time-dependent killing of S. aureus. After establishing the dependencies on medium composition and cation concentration, we challenged S. aureus with the ionophores (10× MIC) in a time-dependent fashion (Fig. 5) and compared their activity to that of chloramphenicol and vancomycin. In an early exponential-phase culture (5 × 105 CFU/mL), all ionophores except for nanchangmycin displayed bactericidal behavior. Lasalocid and calcimycin caused a rapid decline in CFU that dropped below our level of detection within just 12 h. The same two compounds also showed the greatest effect in a late exponential-phase culture (2 × 107 CFU/mL). This also reflects the rather large difference in MIC and MBC that we observed for many of the ionophores. In conclusion, when the effects in the biofilm and persister assays and time-dependent killing are viewed in combination, nanchangmycin, lasalocid, and calcimycin stand out as promising for further investigation as antibiotic leads. FIG 5Time-dependent killing of S. aureus. S. aureus was grown to early (A) and late (B) exponential phase and treated with ionophores at 10× MIC (in CM-M9 medium) for 0, 2, 4, 8, 12, and 24 h, at which point cells were harvested and CFU/mL was enumerated (cutoff: 102 CFU/mL). Vancomycin (10× MIC of 2 μg/mL) and chloramphenicol (1× MIC of 16 μg/mL) were included as bactericidal and bacteriostatic controls, respectively. Individual data points are means ± SD (n = 3) of technical triplicates (distinct wells). Figure is representative of two biological replicates. Time-dependent killing of S. aureus. S. aureus was grown to early (A) and late (B) exponential phase and treated with ionophores at 10× MIC (in CM-M9 medium) for 0, 2, 4, 8, 12, and 24 h, at which point cells were harvested and CFU/mL was enumerated (cutoff: 102 CFU/mL). Vancomycin (10× MIC of 2 μg/mL) and chloramphenicol (1× MIC of 16 μg/mL) were included as bactericidal and bacteriostatic controls, respectively. Individual data points are means ± SD (n = 3) of technical triplicates (distinct wells). Figure is representative of two biological replicates. Genes affecting ionophore susceptibility. When assessing the potential of polyether ionophores as antibiotic leads, one important aspect to address is the frequency of resistance, especially considering that many ionophores are used in agriculture. In addition, this can also provide insights into an antibiotic’s mechanism of action, as mutations which confer resistance can reveal the compound’s target. The organisms which produce the ionophores often contain genes conferring self-resistance. In the case of the ionophore tetronasin, Linton et al. (26) showed that two genes encoding a ATP-dependent efflux system in Streptomyces
longisporoflavus conferred resistance to tetronasin when transferred to otherwise susceptible Streptomyces lividans and Streptomyces
albus. Similarly, the biosynthetic gene clusters associated with monensin (BGC0000100), lasalocid (BGC0000087), and nanchangmycin (BGC0000105) found in the MIBiG (Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene Cluster) database (27) all contain predicted efflux systems, indicating that this is the dominant resistance mechanism among the producing strains. To investigate this in a human pathogen, we examined resistance against selected ionophores: first, unsuccessfully, in the standard single-step challenge of a dense inoculum on agar plates containing 1× MBC, and next by a sequential passaging method in which an S. aureus culture was treated with sub-inhibitory concentrations every day for 4 weeks (Fig. 6). In this type of experiment, as the bacteria become less susceptible over time, and perhaps resistant, the MIC value will increase. However, after 25 days of continuous treatment, the S. aureus culture was barely affected by the exposure. For lasalocid, salinomycin, and calcimycin, only a 4-fold increase in the tolerated concentration was observed, which was comparable to the vancomycin control. In comparison, resistance to ciprofloxacin developed rapidly, as expected. These data mirror prior observations in the literature in which resistance toward polyether ionophores is not easily achieved and that their frequency of resistance is very low considering their extensive use (28). Interestingly, the S. aureus culture treated with nanchangmycin was slightly more affected after the first 25 days of treatment, with a 16-fold change in inhibitory concentration, and this treatment was therefore continued. After 40 days of continuous treatment, susceptibility was decreased, resulting in an apparent 64- to 128-fold increase in the MIC. However, when isolating single colonies to determine the final MIC values of the resistant strains, a modest 4- to 16-fold increase in the MIC was observed compared to the wild-type S. aureus strain (Fig. 6B). The nanchangmycin-resistant strains were checked for cross-resistance toward the other three ionophores, as this could have indicated whether a shared resistance mechanism was involved. However, none of the isolates showed any difference in tolerance to lasalocid, salinomycin, or calcimycin, thereby ruling out a common acquired resistance phenotype. We sequenced the genomes of three resistant strains and that of the wild-type S. aureus strain, which revealed several genes with mutations common to all three mutants and absent from the wild type (see Table S2). Among these were the gene encoding TrkH (WP_000021864.1), involved in potassium uptake; the gene encoding MspA (WP_001161085.1), a protein hypothesized to be membrane-stabilizing (29); and the gene encoding the transcriptional regulator SarV (WP_000066900.1), which is involved in the autolysis of S. aureus (30). Several mutations in both mspA and sarV were common to strains 1 and 3, while strain 2 only showed one mutation in each. These results matched previous reports that acquired ionophore-resistance is linked to efflux or decreased permeability (31, 32), but the proximate cause remains elusive. To gain additional insight into the ionophores’ mechanism of action, we screened the Nebraska Transposon Mutant Library (NTML), a mutant library in an MRSA strain with transposons inserted into 1,920 individual non-essential genes, for increased sensitivity to lasalocid, salinomycin, calcimycin, and nanchangmycin in an agar plate assay. Here, we primarily found hits with perturbations in the electron transport chain to be more sensitive to the ionophores (see Table S3). Measuring the MICs of the mutants in a liquid-based assay revealed that inactivation of aroC (encoding chorismate synthase) or hemB (encoding delta-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase) had the biggest effect on ionophore sensitivity, while mutations in genes of the quinol oxidase subunits I, II, or III (qoxABC), NADH:ubiquinone reductase (ndh2), or protoheme IX farnesyltransferase (cyoE) produced 2-fold decreases in the MICs of lasalocid, salinomycin, and nanchangmycin. None of the mutations influenced calcimycin sensitivity in a liquid setting. We have previously observed that many of these transposon mutants have a reduced membrane potential (33) and hemB has also been associated with small colony variants (34). FIG 6Resistance studies. (A) Resistance toward ionophores was developed with a sequential passaging method. S. aureus was treated with five ionophore concentrations (0.25× to 4× MIC), and the MIC was determined each day. The culture grown at the highest concentration (0.5× new MIC) was passed on to the following day and treated with concentrations relative to the new MIC value. This was continued for 25 to 40 days. Ciprofloxacin and vancomycin were included as positive and negative controls, respectively. Data points are means ± SD (n = 3). (B) The three nanchangmycin-treated cultures on day 40 in panel A were subjected to MIC analysis to confirm resistance and checked for cross-resistance toward the other three ionophores. Wild-type S. aureus DSM 20231 was included as a control strain. Data points are means ± SD (n = 3), and results are a representative of biological duplicates. Resistance studies. (A) Resistance toward ionophores was developed with a sequential passaging method. S. aureus was treated with five ionophore concentrations (0.25× to 4× MIC), and the MIC was determined each day. The culture grown at the highest concentration (0.5× new MIC) was passed on to the following day and treated with concentrations relative to the new MIC value. This was continued for 25 to 40 days. Ciprofloxacin and vancomycin were included as positive and negative controls, respectively. Data points are means ± SD (n = 3). (B) The three nanchangmycin-treated cultures on day 40 in panel A were subjected to MIC analysis to confirm resistance and checked for cross-resistance toward the other three ionophores. Wild-type S. aureus DSM 20231 was included as a control strain. Data points are means ± SD (n = 3), and results are a representative of biological duplicates. Polyether ionophores synergize with polymyxin B to target Gram-negative pathogens. Polyether ionophores are generally regarded as being inactive against Gram-negative pathogens. Although their ability (documented in this study) to target drug-resistant, Gram-positive clinical isolates, as well as persister populations and bacterial biofilm, is undoubtedly appealing, their lack of activity against Gram-negative pathogens is a clear limitation of this compound class. It is likely that polyether ionophores cannot efficiently penetrate the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria and that this is the reason for their low activity. Although uptake efficiency, to the best of our knowledge, has not been experimentally determined for all of the polyether ionophores in Gram-negative strains, Guyot et al. (35) showed that calcimycin bound to Escherichia coli but never entered the cells. This lack of penetration is also supported by studies using E. coli mutant strains with increased outer membrane permeability that remain sensitive to polyether ionophores and by studies showing that the polymyxin derivative PMBN sensitizes E. coli to calcimycin (15, 36). We hypothesized that combinations with compounds such as polymyxin B, which specifically target the outer membrane and is known to increase permeability toward other antibiotics, might allow all of the ionophores to act against Gram-negative pathogens, including E. coli, and we therefore performed a systematic study of these effects. None of the ionophores had any stand-alone effect against E. coli (or Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumannii, Fig. S2), but salinomycin (fractional inhibitory concentration [FIC] 0.25), calcimycin (FIC 0.125), and nanchangmycin (FIC 0.25) all lowered the MIC value for polymyxin B in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 7). Conducting the same experiment with an antibiotic with an intracellular target (kanamycin, ribosome) indicates that the outer membrane is in fact the only thing preventing ionophores from exerting their effect on Gram-negative bacteria. Interestingly, lasalocid did not have clear synergy with polymyxin B, an observation that we are not currently able to explain. Collectively, these data suggest that inclusion of polyether ionophores in antibiotic cocktails should be systematically tested in pre-clinical settings. FIG 7Combinatorial treatment in wild-type E. coli. E. coli were treated with either polymyxin B or kanamycin (black curves) in combination with selected ionophores, which were added as a fixed dosage (concentration range: 0.13 to 16 μg/mL). The antibiotics were tested as 2-fold serial dilutions up to 16 μg/mL (polymyxin B) or 32 μg/mL (kanamycin). The ionophores were tested as single treatments (lasalocid, dark red circles; salinomycin, dark green; calcimycin, dark blue; nanchangmycin, dark purple) as negative controls. Results are representative of two biological replicates, and data points are means ±SD (n = 3). Combinatorial treatment in wild-type E. coli. E. coli were treated with either polymyxin B or kanamycin (black curves) in combination with selected ionophores, which were added as a fixed dosage (concentration range: 0.13 to 16 μg/mL). The antibiotics were tested as 2-fold serial dilutions up to 16 μg/mL (polymyxin B) or 32 μg/mL (kanamycin). The ionophores were tested as single treatments (lasalocid, dark red circles; salinomycin, dark green; calcimycin, dark blue; nanchangmycin, dark purple) as negative controls. Results are representative of two biological replicates, and data points are means ±SD (n = 3). Conclusion. In this study, we have demonstrated that polyether ionophores, despite their joint, canonical characteristics as ion-transporters, are in fact quite heterogeneous with respect to their antibacterial properties. The compounds’ dependencies on cation concentrations are distinct, and some display the ability to eradicate bacterial biofilms and inhibit persister populations. We show that resistance to polyether ionophores is difficult to achieve and does not result in cross-resistance within the ionophore family. Very recently, Zhu et al. (37) reported equally promising persister and biofilm potency for the ionophore nigericin, a compound we had originally omitted due to its low solubility in our carrier dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). They demonstrated in vivo efficacy against S. aureus in a mouse model, emphasizing the potential of ionophores as antibiotics. Finally, we show that combinations with polymyxin B can expand the antibiotic activity of the ionophores into also covering Gram-negative bacteria. This is particularly interesting given the increasing challenges associated with drug-resistant Gram-negative pathogens.