Discussion Given the promising activity of griselimycin as a potential anti-TB drug, its innovative target DnaN, and the involvement of nonproteogenic amino acids in target binding, we became interested in identifying additional natural products exhibiting similar chemical moieties. Investigation of all publically available actinobacterial genomes using (2 S,4 R)−4-MePro biosynthesis genes4 unveiled a previously unknown BGC with additional interesting precursor biosynthetic genes compared to the GM pathway. This finding inadvertently disclosed the mycoplanecin BGC and correlated it to these compounds initially discovered in the 1980s with potent and specific anti-tuberculosis bioactivities12–16. Here, four MPs, including one new congener with the most potent anti-Mtb bioactivity, were isolated and found to contain several unusual nonproteogenic amino acid residues, including three different 4-alkylprolines. Marfey’s analysis plus the NRPS E domain for the first time proved the absolute stereochemistry of the MPs. These amino acid residues, especially (2 S,4 R)−4-EtPro and (2 S,4 R)−4-PrPro, are scarce in natural products. Interestingly, the 4-PrPro and 4-EtPro in lincomycins instead derive from l-tyrosine degradation as catalyzed by a subcluster of six genes25 which are not present in the MP BGC. A step-by-step in vitro total reconstitution of the BCAA-like pathway of MP biosynthesis revealed a set of promiscuous enzymes which build unusual homo-amino acids from different 2-oxo acids. Subsequently, we in vitro reconstituted 4-EtPro using a pair of GriEF-like enzymes from the MP pathway. A feeding study with l-Methionine-(methyl-13C) suggested the extra carbons of 4-EtPro and 4-PrPro over 4-MePro in MPs likely to come from radical SAM methylation by MypH. The successful total in vitro reconstitution of 4-EtPro formation starting from 3 implied a potential 4-alkylproline pathway with a yet uncertain methylation timepoint (Figs. 6c and 7a). Considering the substrate tolerance of all related Myp enzymes as shown for homo-amino acids and 4-EtPro reconstitution, one reasonable pathway is MypE hydroxylation of 12 to form 13 and subsequent oxidation and spontaneous cyclization yielding the pyrroline intermediate that is further reduced to (2 S,4 R)−4-EtPro. The 4-PrPro residue can be produced following the same logic. However, it requires the previously unknown 3-methyl-2-oxohexanoic acid as the starting substrate, which needs experimental proof in the future (Fig. 6c). It is still mysterious when exactly MypH performs its function since potentially the radical methylation can either take place on the 4-alkylproline precursor or as a tailoring step to modify MP B directly. Intriguingly, MPs showed significantly more potent anti-Mtb bioactivity than GMs. We demonstrated that the new congener MP E shows the most potent MIC (0.083 µg/mL), exhibiting 24-fold higher potency against Mtb H37Rv than GM. We showed MP A in our hands has a four-fold lower MIC (0.102 µg/mL) against Mtb H37Rv than initially reported (0.39 µg/mL)14. The analogous chemical structures of MPs and GMs align with their identical molecular target site within DnaN. In comparison to GM and CGM, the higher potency of MP A might be attributed to the increased hydrophobicity of the substance and the larger van der Waals interface with DnaN. The 5-methyl-l-norleucine at position 6 might also play a role by pushing the generally less-tight bound region around Pro8 out of the binding pocket but stabilizing the tighter interaction around the ligand’s bifurcation. The co-crystal structure of ecDnaN bound with MP A and the nanomolar binding affinity of MPs to msDnaN validates DnaN as the molecular target. The binding mode is similar to GM and CGM, albeit MPs showed significantly stronger anti-Mtb bioactivity. This finding is of great importance as GM development towards a TB drug was stopped due to unwanted but target-independent side effects (unpublished results). As mycoplanecins show significantly lower MICs they might be useful to overcome this limitation as the potential therapeutic window over the side effect is significantly improved. TB is still one of the leading public health threats, even during the global COVID-19 pandemic. Drug-resistant strains of Mtb further deepen the crisis because we are running out of our antibiotic arsenal. The low cytotoxicity and specific anti-mycobacterial activity thus make MPs promising candidates to be developed as potent and safe anti-TB drugs that are likely not detrimental to human microbiota. The discovery of highly potent antibiotics exhibiting the rare target DnaN, and the unusual biosynthesis of the molecular building blocks sets the stage for continuous efforts into future mycoplanecin development.