Discussion It is intriguing to see how the world of small alkaloids merges with that of ribosomal natural products. The recent discovery that the pyrroloquinoline alkaloids ammosamides are in fact RiPPs36 and crocagins may just be the beginning. We propose the following biosynthetic scheme for crocagins (Fig. 5b): After expression of CgnA, the precursor peptide is processed by the proteins CgnB, CgnC and CgnE and undergoes hydroxylation at the Tyr20 and Trp21 Cβ positions, which triggers the two ring-closing reactions. It is possible that pyrroloindoline formation is the first ring-closure reaction, but we think that the seeming absence of an indole ‘activator’ (for example, C3 prenylation; Supplementary Fig. 1) and the disfavoured nature of 5-endo-trig ring-forming reactions makes it more likely that the pyrroloindoline forms second. In a small fraction of CgnA, the hydroxylated Tyr20 Cβ is oxidized to the ketone, which results in a double bond between the Tyr20 Cα and Cβ upon ring closure and thus ultimately the formation of 2. This reaction would not be catalysed by CgnB, but rather be spontaneous and slow. In our view, it is likely that the observed CgnA +28 Da peak is a shunt product and an artefact of a system missing either CgnB or CgnE. It is unclear if the CgnA +16 Da peak is a shunt product or true intermediate, because we do not observe it when CgnB and CgnE are both present. The +30 Da peak, which we observe only in reactions where 3a and 3b are formed, appears to be an intermediate towards 2, because MS2 analysis placed the keto group on the core peptide’s Tyr, while the Trp is hydroxylated (Supplementary Fig. 6). The intermediates 3a and 3b are then cleaved by CgnD to release the core scaffold and make the N terminus available for methylation by CgnL. It remains unclear if N-methylation or carbamoylation occurs first, or whether both modifications are independent of each other, since the des-carbamoyl 1 can be observed after knocking out cgnI in vivo24. It is also possible that carbamoylation occurs prior to leader peptide cleavage, which would offer an alternative explanation for the slow turnover of CgnD that we observed. CgnE appears to recruit the substrate peptide CgnA to CgnC and assist in catalysis, perhaps by presenting the core peptide in a specific conformation or by ensuring appropriate timing of the hydroxylation reactions, but does not seem to possess catalytic activity itself. The CgnE homologue CgnB on the other hand appears to possess catalytic activity. Unfortunately, all attempts to obtain crystal structures of CgnA–CgnB or CgnA–CgnE complexes, which would reveal more details of the interactions, failed. A search for CgnB and CgnE in available genomic data places them in a variety of genomes that warrant further investigation. In all cases where two copies were found, they were placed in a crocagin-like BGC with a CgnC homologue, and we thus expect them to install the hallmark tetracyclic core. While these BGCs also contained a methyltransferase, likely to cap the N terminus as observed in crocagins, we were surprised by the variety of different putative modifying enzymes. These may be used for the modification of the hydroxyl group found at the Trp Cβ (glycosylation), the Trp carboxy group (decarboxylation) or the Tyr hydroxyl group. Further studies will be required to identify the natural products of these BGCs, explore their bioactivities and link predicted open reading frames to biosynthetic functions. Interestingly, the gene annotated as G in the BGC identified in Anabaena (Fig. 3d) shares 61% sequence identity with a bifunctional 6′-aminoglycoside-N-acetyltransferase/aminoglycoside-2′-phosphotransferase37, which confers broad-spectrum resistance to aminoglycoside antibiotics. It may serve as a self-resistance gene and hint at the bioactivity of glycosylated crocagin derivatives. It will be fascinating to investigate the crocagin biosynthetic system in more detail, as these data could then be used in conjunction with enzymes from the newly discovered crocagin-like BGCs to access a structurally diverse family of peptide-derived pyrroloindoline alkaloids.