Discussion Recent studies have demonstrated the value of exploiting CS using antimicrobial chemistry to curtail the emergence of drug resistance10,11,13,37. In this work, we present a high-throughput screening platform, termed CSP, for the systematic identification of CS-active compounds in large chemical libraries. CSP leverages a diverse single mutant target panel to facilitate annotation of the gene/pathway responsible for resistance, and by extension highlight one-compound-to-one-gene CS interactions. Initial screening of 80 commercial antimicrobials covering 30 drug classes using CSP revealed both known and novel CS relationships (Fig. 2). Imamovic and Sommer have previously identified CS interactions between aminoglycoside-resistant strains and multiple antimicrobials, including cefuroxime, tetracyclines, and chloramphenicol10. We have observed similar CS interactions in our aminoglycoside-resistant strains against these same compounds and/or same-class analogues, suggesting an underlying CS relationship despite variations in the specific mutations that confer aminoglycoside resistance. Interestingly, the aminoglycoside resistance-chloramphenicol CS interaction shown in this study extended to the fluorinated methyl-sulfonyl chloramphenicol analogue florfenicol, but not the defluorinated methyl-sulfonyl analogue thiamphenicol, further suggesting that this class of compounds possesses a unique structure-activity relationship with its CS target. In addition, all three amphenicols exhibited reproducible CS activity in both plasmid-borne MDR strains carrying clinical resistance cassettes from the IncF incompatibility group18. Whether these CS relationships derive from a common CS target or are caused by different CS relationships for each resistant strain remains an open question, but the consistent CS profiles between members of the same antibiotic class demonstrates the varied and pervasive nature of CS relationships in drug-resistant populations. Subsequent CSP screening of our 6195-member natural product extract library also revealed widespread CS interactions in nature (Fig. 3). To our knowledge, this screen represents the largest and most comprehensive examination of antimicrobial CS in natural products to date. In contrast to previous CS studies which have focused on known antimicrobials, or in one instance antimicrobial peptides11, NPs offer unparalleled chemical diversity and biological relevance from a therapeutic perspective27. The broader conclusion from this study is that CS interactions are prevalent in NP libraries, and are compound class specific, suggesting that a large number of CS agents remain to be discovered. The discovery of NP-based CS agents differs from conventional NP adjuvant or synergy screens where a primary antibiotic is co-dosed along with the test extract to discover NPs that restore the activity of the primary compound. Instead, CSP exclusively identifies extracts with preferential activity against drug-resistant mutants over WT, where the CS agent is itself active against the resistant strain. Using a set of triage protocols and secondary screening procedures, hit extracts from the library were examined in detail. These efforts led to the isolation of the borrelidin family of NPs, with borrelidin A (1) producing MICs 128- and 64-fold lower in the Cef6 (rfaH W4*) and Cef7 (rfaG E289fs) strains compared to WT, respectively. Several studies from the existing literature help to contextualize this finding. First, knockouts of genes responsible for lipopolysaccharide (LPS) biosynthesis (rfa) in E. coli have been shown to increase resistance against β-lactams, including cephalosporin compounds38–40. These mutants produce a variably truncated LPS core that discourages trimerization of outer membrane porins, which themselves facilitate the entry of small polar drugs. Recently, Wang et al. reported that truncated LPS mutants exhibit decreased transcription and expression of porins OmpF and OmpC, but increased transcription of the β-lactam resistance gene blr39. Second, both laboratory and clinical isolates of β-lactam-resistant E. coli have been found to contain mutations in thrS41, the known target of the borrelidins. Studies have shown that inactivation of ThrRS results in a stringent response that reduces bacterial growth rate, which contributes to the observed resistance phenotype41,42. In this study, we show that 1 is a concentration-dependent inhibitor of ThrRS that preferentially kills cephalosporin-resistant E. coli (with deleterious mutations in rfa genes) as well as a MDR strain carrying the RK2 plasmid from clinical isolates of K. aerogenes19 (Fig. 4). We furthermore demonstrate that this CS activity cannot be replicated by combination therapy between 1 and ceftazidime in the WT, and is therefore solely the result of the resistance mutations (Supplementary Fig. 4). Several studies have found that rfa mutants exhibit increased sensitivities to large, nonpolar antibiotics due to truncated LPS and thus a weaker protective barrier38; a finding corroborated in our own antimicrobial screen (Supplementary Fig. 1). While this offers a possible explanation for the borrelidins’ CS activity, quantitative mass spectrometry has shown that the intracellular concentrations of 1 do not increase between WT and the cephalosporin-resistant rfa mutants (Supplementary Fig. 5). This finding refutes increased influx, decreased efflux, and inactivation/digestion of 1 as the cause for CS. The combination of existing evidence would suggest that the loss of biological fitness owing to both rfa-related LPS truncation and ThrRS inhibition is responsible for the observed CS interaction. The cytotoxicity exhibited by the known borrelidins precludes their use in a clinical context,35,43 although the toxicity profile for the new desnitrile analogue 4 has yet to be determined. Compound 4 remains active in a CS context despite lacking the nitrile moiety widely reported to be essential for ThrRS inhibition. ThrRS overexpression only weakly attenuates the activity of 4 compared to 1, and to a much lesser extent, suggesting that alternative targets may play a role in the observed CS activity. This finding is consistent with previous studies that have found secondary targets of 1 in other systems32,35. Together, the borrelidins serve as valuable proof-of-concept that NPs inactive against wildtype pathogens may possess potent CS activities against their drug-resistant variants. CSP of our NP library has revealed plentiful examples of such relationships, with unique distributions of CS activity in a host of diverse drug-resistant strains. Because the CS-active compounds prioritized from this screen are selectively active against drug-resistant populations, they are typically only weakly active against WT strains, making them unsuitable as frontline monotherapies. Instead, the value of CS agents stems from their ability to selectively target drug-resistant populations via mechanisms that are distinct from partner antimicrobials11. Co-dosing 1 at either 32 or 128 μM (sub-MIC concentrations in WT) with ceftazidime suppressed ceftazidime resistance below the EUCAST36 breakpoint for E. coli (4 μM) over a period of 12 days (Fig. 5A). By contrast, in the CS-null condition (ceftazidime co-dosed with norfloxacin), resistance to ceftazidime evolved at the nearly the same rate as ceftazidime alone, despite the presence of two antibiotics with different mechanisms of action. Furthermore, the resulting drug-resistant strains showed extensive CR to other cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones (and thus MDR; Fig. 5B). Co-dosing with 1 presented no self-resistance and instead led to the emergence of CS to fluoroquinolones, supporting the fundamental finding that CS manifests in fitness trade-offs concomitant with the evolution of drug resistance. Together these results pave the way for the discovery of a new suite of natural product-based CS agents with direct application in the prevention and treatment of AMR infections.