DISCUSSION It is generally accepted that two 16S rRNA methylations, m7G1405 and m1A1408, confer resistance to overlapping sets of aminoglycoside antibiotics (4,31). However, very little direct experimental evidence for the target site for modification previously existed for the majority of the enzymes proposed to catalyse incorporation of these modifications and systematic analyses of the resistance profiles conferred are lacking. This is a particular concern since resistance profiles often form a significant part of the basis for classification of new 16S rRNA MT enzymes from producer strains and pathogenic bacterial isolates (34,38,39). Furthermore, confusion in the literature on the origin and nature of certain aminoglycoside resistance enzymes has compounded this problem. For example, it was originally thought that the methylation site for GrmA from M. echinospora (synonym M. purpurea) was successfully experimentally identified as G1405 (5), but this was later shown to be KgmB from S. tenebrarius (7). Our study has now experimentally demonstrated that three further methyltransferases originating from different actinomycetes genera (Sgm, GrmA and Krm) methylate the 16S rRNA residue G1405, as was shown for KgmB (5,7). A potential resolution of a second historical point of confusion with the Kam family of A1408 MTs was recently suggested by Koscinski and colleagues (37) on the basis of protein structure prediction and homology searches. Initial studies on these enzymes used genomic libraries from encoding strains to express the resistance MTs from randomly cloned DNA fragments in Streptomyces lividans and E. coli and observe resistance phenotypes (9). However, the deposited ORF sequence (NCBI accession number CAF33037) was shortened by 180 nt encoding the Kam protein N-terminus that forms the SAM-binding domain (37). Any attempt to express KamB from the originally suggested start codon failed and recombinant protein did not provide resistance to any aminoglycoside antibiotics (Vasiljevic,B., unpublished data). Therefore, although methylation of A1408 was explicitly shown for kamA (imrA) from S. tenjimariensis and kamC from S. hirsuta, their originally deduced protein sequences of 156 amino acids are unlikely to confer resistance due to the N-terminal truncation (37). Our analysis of KamB from S. tenebrarius, thus experimentally confirms that these 60 additional N-terminal amino acids are essential for a functional Kam family enzyme and that it methylates at A1408 as predicted. The Kgm and Kam enzymes share the Rossmann-like fold that forms the SAM-binding and catalytic domain of these MTs and, given the close proximity of their target nucleosides, they must recognize a very similar molecular surface of the 30S subunit. A key question is therefore how the observed specificity of these enzymes is achieved. Our data, together with recent structural probing of Sgm, and in silico modelling studies of Kgm and Kam MTs indicate that enzymes of each protein family adopt similar topologies but differ primarily in the order of the domains (18,19,37). The co-enzyme/catalytic function is located in the C-terminal domain of Kgm MTs but in the N-terminal domain of Kam enzymes. The position of the additional domain that is presumed to play the major role in target recognition (18,19) is thus reversed in each family. We would speculate that the domain order is the critical factor contributing to the observed specificity of these two enzymes families. To effectively provide resistance, modification of G1405 and A1408 in the aminoglycoside binding pocket of the 30S A-site must perturb interaction between the drug and its target residues in order to sufficiently lower its affinity and thus efficacy. Our results systematically establish the link between the 16S rRNA modification type and aminoglycoside antibiotic resistance pattern conferred by these modifications. Both groups of 2-DOS antibiotics bind to 16S rRNA so that their Ring I substituents (see chemical structures associated with Table 1) are placed in close proximity to A1408. The methylated nucleotide (m1A1408) is positively charged at neutral pH, and can therefore affect drug binding not only by steric hindrance but also by charge repulsion. This modification confers resistance to apramycin and the kanamycin group of 4,6-DOS aminoglycosides other than gentamicin. The modification does not, however, confer significant resistance to paromomycin (5) despite the observation of two direct hydrogen bonds to A1408 in the crystal structure of the antibiotic-30S complex (40). It is possible that additional contacts made by other parts of these drugs sufficiently compensate for those lost near A1408. Alternatively, secondary binding sites on the 70S ribosome might account for the unaltered antibiotic susceptibility as shown recently for paromomycin and gentamicin which also bind to 23S rRNA helix 69 in the vicinity of the P-site tRNA to inhibit ribosome recycling (41). Paromomycin is also known to inhibit 30S subunit assembly with approximately equal efficiency as it inhibits translation (42,43). Thus, simple protection of the primary target site by methylation may not be sufficient to provide resistance against these antibiotics. In high-resolution structures of the 4,6-DOS aminoglycosides gentamicin C1a (44) and tobramycin (45) in complex with A-site model RNAs, both antibiotics make direct contacts to G1405 via their Ring III substituents. Methylation of this nucleotide would thus directly interfere with antibiotic binding, by inducing a steric clash between the modified base and Ring III, in addition to possible electrostatic repulsion by the positive charge on modified nucleobase. In contrast, 4,5-DOS aminoglycosides, such as paromomycin and neomycin, project their substituent at position 5 at different angle, directing it away from G1405, so that methylation at this site does not interfere with their binding. The m7G1405 modification by Kgm MTs is thus only effective against 4,6-DOS aminoglycosides, but does confer high-level resistance to both kanamycin and gentamicin antibiotic groups as measured in our MIC analysis with several Kgm family MTs (Table 1). To date, aminoglycoside resistance spectra for Kgm MTs were primarily analysed only in homologous host strains, i.e. high G+C Gram-positive bacteria such as S. lividans TK21 and Micromonospora melanosporea (10,46). Our study therefore provides new functional insight into the activity of these enzymes in the Gram-negative heterologous host E. coli. We have shown that all resistance MTs analysed, Sgm, GrmA, KgmB and Krm, can confer high level resistance to 4,6-DOS antibiotics (Table 1) via modification of G1405 of 16S rRNA in E. coli. Each of these resistance MTs from three different actinomycetes genera is equally effective in providing high-level aminoglycoside resistance at a level comparable to the original Gram-positive hosts. This observation firmly establishes resistance MTs acquisition by Gram-negative micro-organisms from surrounding Gram-positive bacteria as a potential source of these enzymes in pathogens. Genes from Gram-positive organisms are known to express in Gram-negative bacteria and recent data have showed that although horizontal gene transfer is extensive it is polarized in direction, from Gram-positive to Gram-negative organisms (47). Therefore, it is possible for resistance MT genes to transfer from antibiotic producing Gram-positive bacteria to Gram-negative pathogens, supporting the notion that Arm family MTs originated in actinomycetes or related antibiotic-producing organisms (48,49). This idea recently found an anchor point with the realization of the tremendous potential of soil microbial communities to overcome any antibiotic pressure and even use antibiotics as sole carbon source to support growth (50,51). This soil antibiotic resistome forms an immense and diverse pool of resistance genes ready to be mobilized into any micro-organism, including pathogenic bacteria. This is undoubtedly a major factor in the ability of pathogenic bacteria to rapidly develop resistance to antibiotics and contribute to the increasing frequency of multi-drug resistant isolates (52). As this global antibiotic resistance problem has escalated, aminoglycosides have assumed an increasing importance in clinical practice due to their broad antimicrobial spectrum, rapid bactericidal action and ability to act synergistically with other antibiotics, such as beta-lactams. A detailed understanding of all resistance mechanisms for aminoglycosides will therefore be an essential component of combating this threat.