DISCUSSION FlK, a thioesterase from fluoroacetate producing S. cattleya, hydrolyzes the thioester bond of FAcCoA but not that of AcCoA. The selectivity of FlK to distinguish FAcCoA from AcCoA is remarkable because it ensures that AcCoA, a key intermediate of the primary metabolism is not cleaved by mistake. The only difference between the two compounds is the presence of a fluorine atom in FAcCoA but not in AcCoA. A combination of x-ray crystallography with site-directed mutagenesis experiments allowed us to gain insights into both catalytic mechanism and the unique substrate specificity of FlK. Our investigations suggest that FlK utilizes a catalytic triad composed of a threonine (Thr42), a histidine (His76), and a water molecule. The imidazole side chain of His76 acts as a base to deprotonate the hydroxyl of Thr42. The nucleophile Thr42-Oγ attacks the fluoroacetyl carbonyl carbon, forming a tetrahedral transition intermediate. The positive charge generated on the His76 residue is stabilized by the hydrogen bonding between the imidazole ring and the conserved water molecule. Reformation of the carbonyl double bond breaks the carbon-sulfur bond. A second tetrahedral intermediate is then formed between the -OH part of a water molecule and the carbonyl group of the fluoroacetyl-FlK intermediate. The remaining proton of the water is bonded to His76. When the carbonyl bond reforms, the bond to the Thr42-Oγ is broken, releasing the fluoroacetate. The His76-bonded hydrogen is transferred to Thr42-Oγ, reestablishing the hydrogen bonding between Thr42 and His76. The Glu50, which is conserved in most type II thioesterases as the catalytic residue, is not a part of the catalytic mechanism of FlK but plays an important role in maintaining the configuration of the active site. It is not unexpected that T42SFlK is active because the Ser42-Oγ can still form a hydrogen bond with the imidazole side chain of His76 and therefore has the potential to act as a nucleophile as the Thr42-Oγ in WtFlK. When FAcCoA concentration was higher than 12 μm, however, excess-substrate inhibition (38) was observed for the mutant. In other words, high concentrations of FAcCoA inhibited the activity of T42SFlK. We speculate that the absence of the Thr42-Cγ in T42SFlK may have created more space, allowing an easier access of substrate to the active site, especially at low substrate concentrations, giving rise to the lower Km value and the higher turnover of T42SFlK reaction as compared with WtFlK activity. However, the same mutation also increased protein flexibility, as shown by the double confirmations of the active site residues in some of the protomers of the mutant (Fig. 6). The enzyme-substrate complex formed between these abnormal active sites and substrate could be non-productive. At high substrate concentrations, the chance of non-productive enzyme-substrate complex formation increases when more and more normal active sites are occupied by FAcCoA. The formation of non-productive enzyme-substrate complex at the active site of one protomer may also interfere with the catalytic activity of the partner protomer of the same dimer. These may explain the excess-substrate inhibition phenomenon observed for T42SFlK and E50AFlK, but the exact mechanism remains to be elucidated. FlK is a homodimer with a hot dog fold similar to other type II thioesterases, although it does not show extensive sequence similarity to any type II thioesterases with known function. A common feature shared by nearly all functionally characterized hot dog fold thioesterases is the presence of an acidic residue, aspartate or glutamate, providing general base catalysis. One exception is FcoT, a long-chain fatty acyl-CoA thioesterase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which has a hot dog fold but uses an active site completely different from that of either type I or type II thioesterases. FcoT has been proposed to represent a new class of thioesterases, type III thioesterases (39). With a type II thioesterase fold, the catalytic machinery of FlK (Thr-His-water) resembles those of type I thioesterases (Ser/Cys-base-acid), exhibiting an unconventional combination of protein fold and catalytic mechanism. Superposition of FlK with 18 structures of type II thioesterases from the Protein Data Bank reveals that the Glu50 in FlK is well conserved in most of these thioesterases, although in some cases, it is an aspartate instead of a glutamate (data not shown). Among all of the hot dog fold proteins in the Protein Data Bank, only two hypothetical proteins, TTHA0967 (Protein Data Bank entry 2CWZ) from Thermus thermophilus and TM0581 (Protein Data Bank entry 2Q78) from Thermotoga maritime, have shown head-to-tail sequence similarity to FlK (33 and 22% identity, respectively). Superposition of FlK with these two structures has revealed a very similar putative active site in 2CWZ and 2Q78. Most of the residues lining the active site of FlK, Thr42, Glu50, Gly69, and His76, are well conserved in 2CWZ (Thr36, Glu44, Gly63, and His76) and in 2Q78 (Thr38, His72, and Arg116) with the following differences. First, the counterpart of the Arg120 of FlK in 2CWZ is a glutamine (Gln115). The Arg120 in the unliganded FlK interacts through its guanidinium group with the carboxyl side chain of Glu50. The amide side chain of Gln115 in CWZ2, however, is pointing in the opposite direction with no possibility of forming any direct contact with Glu44. A large empty space can be observed in the putative active site of 2CWZ due to this change of Arg to Gln. If 2CWZ is also an acyl-CoA thioesterase, the substrate should have a larger acyl moiety than a fluoroacetyl group. Second, the equivalents of FlK Glu50 and Gly69 in 2Q78 are His46 and Val65, respectively. The imidazole side chain of the His46 and the isopropyl group of the Val65 at the active site provide a binding motif quite different from that in FlK. The significant differences in the overall positions of FAcCPan and FAcOPan in the active site of FlK as compared with that of the acetyl-pantheteinyl segment of the T42SFlK-bound AcCoA (Fig. 3) suggest that binding of the nucleotide portion of the substrate on the enzyme surface dictates the depth to which the fluoroacetyl pantetheinyl arm extends into the active site cleft, ensuring the correct interaction between the arm with the amino acid residues in the vicinity of the active site. Although the sulfur atom of the thioester is considered a poor hydrogen bond acceptor, the transient dipole interaction between the sulfur and the main chain amides along the substrate binding tunnel may also contribute to positioning of the substrate. In the absence of the bulky nucleotide tail and the sulfur atom, FAcCPan moved further into the active site. FAcOPan is retained near the tunnel entrance because the oxygen atom replacing the sulfur atom has a stronger tendency to interact with the main chain amides of the substrate binding tunnel. Although the 3′-phosphoryl ADP tail of FAcCoA is required for the overall positioning of FAcCoA in the FlK active site, the accurate orientation of the fluoroacetyl thioester moiety must be fine tuned by the hydrogen bonding of the fluorine with the side chain of Arg120 and the main chain amide of Gly69 in order to assume the required catalytic coordination. The guanidinium group of Arg120 and the main chain amide of Gly69 appear to be the key determinants for the unusual high substrate specificity of FlK, which serve to recognize the only structural difference between FAcCoA and AcCoA through their interactions with the fluorine of FAcCoA. Moreover, the thioester carbonyl carbon in FAcCoA is more positively charged than that in AcCoA due to the strong electronegativity of fluorine. The interactions between the fluorine and Arg120/Gly69 also help to stabilize this positive charge, making the carbonyl carbon a better target for nucleophilic attack by Thr42-Oγ (Fig. 5).