Discussion C-His6-VanYn was previously produced in BL21(DE3) Star E. coli cells as a cytoplasmatic soluble protein
[13]. In that case, codon usage optimization of the synthetic gene was essential since E. coli is a low G-C ratio (~ 50%) Gram-negative bacterium whereas Nonomuraea sp. is a high G-C Gram-positive actinomycete. The G-C ratio of vanYn is 73.3% which is similar to the genomic ratio of the reference S. coelicolor A3(2) (72%) and S. venezuelae ETH14630 (71%)
[14]. The G-C ratio of the dbv cluster is 70.4%. Notwithstanding our efforts in optimizing cultivation, induction and purification conditions, the best productivity achieved in recombinant E. coli was 4.6 mg/L culture (0.13 mg/g cells)
[17]. Similar level of expression was obtained by other authors who cloned vanXYC from Enterococcus gallinarum BM4174 in E. coli JM83
[21], vanX from Enterococcus faecium BM4147 in E. coli W3110
[22] and vanY from Enterococcus faecium BM4147 in E. coli JM83
[20]. VanXYC, VanX and VanY are d,d-carboxypeptidases/d,d-peptidases homologous to VanYn involved in conferring glycopeptide resistance to enterococci, which are Gram-positive pathogens with low G-C content
[23,24]. By cloning vanYn from Nonomuraea sp. ATCC 39727 in the taxonomically closely related S. venezuelae, pure protein production was at least three folds higher (12 mg/L culture) than in E. coli. Since estimated volumetric productivity in the harvested cells was around 30 mg of protein per liter of culture, there is still room to improve the final yield by further optimization of the purification procedure. Estimated specific productivity of around 1 mg VanYn per gram of cells in streptomycetes was much higher than the one achieved in E. coli (0.13 mg/g cells) confirming that streptomycetes are preferable hosts for VanYn production. Comparable biomass and protein production were achieved at flask and at 3 L bioreactor-scale: maximum values being one day anticipated in bioreactor runs. Fermentation and downstream technologies are well developed for streptomycetes, which are industrially relevant microorganisms producing many valuable antibiotics and other bioactive metabolites
[1]; thus they can be successfully further applied to improving and scaling-up VanYn production. An important difference between heterologous production of VanYn in recombinant streptomycetes and E. coli is the preferential subcellular localization of the protein. VanYn (196 amino acids) contains three different putative domains: a cytoplasmatic domain at the N-terminus (the first 20 amino acids), an hydrophobic trans-membrane portion (20 amino acids), followed by the C-terminal domain exposed on the external face of cytoplasmatic membrane. This extracellular domain contains conserved motifs (SxHxxGxAxD and ExxH) for the coordination of zinc ions and the catalytic active site
[23,25,26]. In E. coli recombinant cells, C-His6-tagged-VanYn was accumulated in the cytoplasm, whereas in streptomycetes the most (90%) of the tagged enzyme was recovered from the cell wall fraction. The localization of VanYn confirms its role in the extracellular phases of cell wall biosynthesis
[23,25]. The addition of detergents did not improve purification from the whole cell extract, confirming that the protein is easily detached from membranes. VanY d,d-carboxypeptidases from glycopeptide resistant enterococci are in fact involved in the extracytoplasmatic hydrolysis of the last d-Ala from the UDP-pentapeptide PG precursors
[20]. The enzymatic activity and the spectral investigation (by CD spectroscopy) confirmed the identity of C-His6-VanYn produced by recombinant cells of either S. venezuelae or E. coli. On substrates that mimic peptidoglycan precursors, VanYn showed d,d-carboxypeptidase and d,d-dipeptidase activity, resembling more VanXYC from VanC-type Enterococcus gallinarum[21] than typical VanY d,d-carboxypeptidases and VanX d,d-peptidases firstly characterized in Enterococcus faecium BM4147
[20,27,28]. On the other hand, the introduction of an histidine hexamer at the N-terminus of VanYn abolishes the enzymatic activity and alters protein secondary structure, suggesting that it interferes with the folding of the active protein. Till now, VanY family of d,d-carboxypeptidases have not been structurally investigated. The possibility to produce discrete amounts of pure VanYn by using S. venezuelae as a cell factory open the way to better investigate the peculiar bifunctional activity of this d,d-dipeptidase/d,d-carboxypeptidase and its interaction with substrates and inhibitors. Finally, the functional study of recombinant VanYn activity in cellular extracts confirmed the role of this protein in conferring glycopeptide resistance in a susceptible host such as S. venezuelae, which lacks those vanRSHAX genes commonly considered essential to confer glycopeptide resistance
[24]. Our data show that when vanYn gene was produced in the biologically active form (C-His6-VanYn or VanYn without any tag), its expression conferred resistance in the absence of vanRSHAX genes, albeit at a reduced level, as previously demonstrated in the homologous producer Nonomuraea sp. ATCC 39727
[12]. As proof of this, expression of the inactive N-His6-VanYn form did not increase the level of resistance towards two glycopeptides (vancomycin and teicoplanin) of the recombinant hosts, which remains the same as in the wild-type and as in the control recombinant strain containing only the empty vector.