Discussion The overall aim of this work was to expand our
knowledge of the regulation of antibiotic production
in Streptomyces (the producer of two thirds of
all known microbial antibiotics). Genetic engineering
of the clavulanic acid producing strains could
be done afterwards, in order to increase the capacity
of clavulanic acid production in S. clavuligerus.
It has been reported that cdaR, the regulatory gene
for the production of a calcium dependent antibiotic
(CDA), positively regulates its own transcription.
As a result, introducing extra copies of cdaR
into different strains of Streptomyces coelicolor
MT1110, S. coelicolor 2377 and Streptomyces
lividans has led to overproduction of this antibiotic
(41). Designing novel antibiotics, on the other
hand, is greatly dependent on the structural analysis
of the gene cluster for each antibiotic. Clavulanic
acid is a multi-billion-dollar per annum product
useful for its β-lactamase inhibitory activity.
While the biosynthesis of clavulanic acid has been
the subject of intense investigation in recent years,
the details of its production and regulation are still
not completely worked out. Amplification of the ccaR gene, a regulatory gene
in the cephamycin gene cluster, resulted in an almost
threefold increase in the production of both
cephamycin and clavulanic acid in S. clavuligerus
(20). The formation of clavulanic acid is controlled
by a LysR-type regulatory protein encoded by the
claR gene. The claR gene was then chosen because
this is a putative regulatory gene in the production
pathway of clavulanic acid (33). The claR gene,
which is located downstream from the gene encoding
clavaminate synthase in the clavulanic acid
biosynthesis gene cluster, is involved in regulation
of the late steps in clavulanic acid biosynthesis
(32-34).
. Amplification of the claR gene using
multi-copy plasmids and under its own promoter
in S. clavuligerus results in a three-fold increase in
clavulanic acid production(31). We precisely amplified the coding sequence of claR
accompanied with its promoter by using a specifically
designed primer and an error proof PCR. In
this case, only the promoter sequence of the gene
comes with the claR. Since the distance between the vector born promoter and the claR transcription
start point is not too great, the expression of
the cloned gene could also be started by two individual
promoters that exist in the vector. Therefore,
the usage of three promoters (one native claR
gene and two vector-born) leads to an elevated
level of claR gene expression. Prior to this study
and in contrast to other regulatory genes in S. clavuligerus,
 claR has not been isolated by PCR, but
has been previously cloned via restriction enzyme
digestion (31). For the first time, in the present
study, the claR gene was isolated from an Iranian
strain of S. clavuligerus PTCC 1705. The PCR isolated
claR was initially compared with the claR sequence
of S. clavuligerus DSM 738, using nested
PCR and restriction digestion analysis. The claR
isolated from the S. clavuligerus PTCC 1705 was
finally sequenced. Thus the entire sequence of S.
clavuligerus claR was determined. The sequencing
data was subjected to bioinformatics analysis
for further comparison with the claR sequence of
S. clavuligerus 738 and other species. Complete
similarity was found between the sequence of
claR isolated from PTCC 1705 andS. clavuligerus
DSM 738. In our previous work, claR was ligated into a Streptomyces
specific vector, pMA::hyg (39). However
that vector does not have any inducible promoter.
On the other hand, pMA::hyg does not contain any
other cut sites for other restriction enzymes (39),
so the subcloning of claR was practically impossible.
To overcome these problems, new primers
were designed with new incorporated cut sites for
BamHI and ClaI. The amplified claR was then
cloned in E.coli by using a newly constructed
vector called pZSclaR (Fig 4). This unique vector
contains a greatly expanded multiple cloning
site (MCS), which makes it suitable for different
purposes of gene cloning. Furthermore, this new
construct is expression and inducible. In the same
way, increasing the copy number of certain clavulanic
acid-specific biosynthetic genes, by the introduction
of multiple copy expression plasmids,
resulted in positive effects on the production of
clavulanic acid (42).