Discussion Pantoea agglomerans is known to produce a variety of antibiotic molecules (Ishimaru et al. 1988; Wright et al. 2001; Jin et al. 2003, 2006). The recently described APV of Pa48b was purified and identified from several strains derived from different geographical sources (Hollenhorst et al. 2009; Sammer et al. 2009). Analysis of the APV biosynthesis gene cluster revealed high identities to the diaminopropionate-peptide biosynthesis cluster of P. agglomerans CU0119 (Hollenhorst et al. 2009; Dawlaty et al. 2010), P. vagans C9-1 (Kamber et al. 2012), and to the noncharacterized gene clusters in S. proteamaculans 568 (accession number: CP000826.1). The function of the genes ddaA-I was described as an unconventional nonribosomal peptide synthesis in the production of the DAP antibiotics of P. agglomerans CU0119 (Dawlaty et al. 2010). Same is postulated for P. vagans C9-1 (Kamber et al. 2012). DdaI is predicted to be a transmembrane efflux pump and is supposed to mediate self-resistance to the antibiotic. DdaC, an Fe(II)/α-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase homolog, was shown to catalyze the epoxidation during diaminopeptide biosynthesis, which occurs only in one of the five DAPs of P. agglomerans CU0119 (DAP E) (Sammer et al. 2009; Hollenhorst et al. 2010) that is very similar to APV. The herbicolin I biosynthesis cluster in P. vagans C9-1 is located on the megaplasmid pPag2 and seems to be highly homolog to the APV biosynthesis gene cluster in Pa48b (Kamber et al. 2012). Megaplasmid preparation and Southern blot analysis using a 0.5-kb fragment of the apvD gene as DIG-labeled DNA probe for hybridization showed that the APV biosynthesis gene cluster is also located on a megaplasmid in Pa48b. Interestingly, antibiotics with similar chemical structures to APV occur in a range of Gram-negative (Shoji et al. 1989) and Gram-positive bacteria (Molloy et al. 1972; Cooper et al. 1988). However, the biosynthesis cluster is rarely found in the different groups, even in the genus Pantoea (Kamber et al. 2012). Most likely, the different strains acquired the necessary genes by horizontal gene transfer. The location of the gene cluster on a megaplasmid could have facilitated the transfer to other species (Thomas and Nielsen 2005). The sequence of the APV gene cluster was also found in the genome of S. proteamaculans 568, but the production of APV by this strain has not been described so far. In silico analysis of the APV biosynthesis gene cluster revealed two gene overlaps of 8 and 14 bp, respectively, which are likely to be involved in the regulation of APV biosynthesis in Pa48b. We assume that the APV biosynthesis is highly regulated on both transcriptional and translational level due to the high toxicity of the antibiotic to growing cells. The overlaps could enhance coordinated transcription and translation (Krakauer 2000) in order to ensure the coordinated biosynthesis of APV. This would prevent the accumulation of cytotoxic 2,3-diaminopropionate-containing precursor of APV (Hollenhorst et al. 2009; Dawlaty et al. 2010). Overlapping regions are not described for the DAP biosynthesis clusters of P. vagans C9-1 or P. agglomerans CU0119 neither for the gene cluster of S. proteamaculans 568. To date, studies about dapdiamides have mostly addressed aspects of their biosynthesis and their mode of action (Hollenhorst et al. 2009, 2010, 2011; Dawlaty et al. 2010). Their biological functions were so far only investigated in pear slice assays by Ishimaru et al. (1988) and Kamber et al. (2012). Both showed an influence of antibiotic production on the biocontrol efficacy of P. vagans C9-1. Mutations that caused the loss of herbicolin I production resulted in reduced pathogen suppression on immature pear slices (Kamber et al. 2012). We assessed the possible role of APV in out-competing of other microorganisms by studying the interaction between APV nonproducing antagonists and plant pathogenic bacteria in different model systems which represent natural infection sites such as apple flowers and wounded leaves. Relevance for in planta antagonism had been shown before for other classes of antibiotics produced by P. agglomerans. Pantocin A and B negative double mutants of P. agglomerans Eh318 had a weaker biocontrol efficacy on E. amylovora than the wild-type. However, single mutants of Eh318 deficient in the production of either one of the two antibiotics were similarly active against E. amylovora as the wild type (Wright and Beer 1996). Likewise, the production of the phenazine antibiotic AGA of Eh1087 significantly enhanced the competitiveness against E. amylovora (Giddens et al. 2003). APV of Pa48b strongly inhibits the growth of E. amylovora under laboratory conditions. A single transposon insertion in apvB resulted in the complete loss of growth inhibition of E. amylovora and Pseudomonas syringae pv. glycinea in agar diffusion assays. The disruption of apvB leads to an absence of l-2,3-diaminopropionate, which acts as a glutamine analog in susceptible organisms. This inhibits the enzyme activity of glucosamine-6-phosphate synthase (GlmS), a key enzyme in cell wall biosynthesis. In plant experiments, apple blossoms and soybean leaves were treated with wild-type Pa48b and the APV deficient mutant Pa48b-C1 and were infected with the pathogens E. amylovora and Pseudomonas syringae pv. glycinea, respectively. The APV-negative mutant Pa48b-C1 still suppressed the fire blight pathogen E. amylovora, as well as disease symptoms on apple blossoms, but its efficacy was inferior to the wild type (Fig. 3A). The bacteriostatic effect of APV can be compensated for in vitro by supplementation with N-acetylglucosamine, a compound that is likely not abundant on apple blossom surfaces (Milewski 2002). Biochemical analysis of pomaceous stigma exudates showed a high quantity of sugars like glucose, fructose, and sucrose and extremely low amounts of amino acids. The predominantly found amino acids were proline, asparagines, glutamine, and serine in a total amount of 0.35 pg per flower (Pusey 2006). In order to show the impact of purified APV on the pathogen Psg inoculated in soybean leaves, APV was applied directly onto infected wounds. The application of APV on the leaves only leads to a minor decrease of Psg population compared with nontreated Psg-infected wounds. The antibiotic may not diffuse into the leaf and therefore did not reach the pathogen inside the leaf. Additionally, Psg is less sensitive to APV than E. amylovora (Sammer et al. 2009). Moreover, increased concentrations of APV (20 μg/wound) caused severe damage of leaf tissue (Fig. 6). In contrast, coinoculation with Pa48b caused a significant decrease in the pathogen population in infected wounds and prevented symptom development. Furthermore, no differences in the biocontrol efficacies of Pa48b and its APV deficient mutant Pa48b-C1 on Psg on soybean leaves were observed. Under all tested temperature conditions, the antagonists equally inhibited the growth of the pathogen Psg despite their difference in APV production. Therefore, APV could not be a key factor in the antagonism. Interestingly, both Pa48b and Pa48b-C1 benefit from the coinoculation with the pathogens, E. amylovora or Psg, which resulted in a one to two orders of magnitude higher population compared with their single inoculation. Similar observations were described by Braun et al. (2009) for the potential biocontrol organism Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae 22d/93 (Pss22d) in coinoculation with Psg. Pss22d grows 10-fold higher in coinoculation than in single inoculation and may cause starvation of Psg that keeps the pathogen below the threshold for disease development (Braun et al. 2009). Likewise, Pa48b and Pa48b-C1 quickly established a stable population in artificial wounds on soybean leaves and therefore represent a competitor for nutrients. The utilization of the same class of organic acids, amino acids, and carbohydrates as energy sources is likely. Pantoea agglomerans and Pseudomonas syringae have a large overlap in their spectrum of usable carbon sources (Wilson and Lindow 1994). Moreover, only 5–10% of the initial pathogen population survived the inoculation process (Braun et al. 2010). Psg, as a soybean-adapted pathogen, recovers rapidly within 1 day in single inoculations, whereas in competition with Pa48b, the pathogen population grows much slower. Interestingly, no decline of the antagonist population (Pa48b and Pa48b-C1) was observed after inoculation. Another aspect regarding nutritional competition is connected to the low iron availability on leaf surfaces and the production of iron-scavenging siderophores (Loper and Buyer 1991). Preliminary tests showed that Pa39b produces five times more of the high-affinity siderophore enterobactin than Pa48b (data not shown). Iron limitation caused by the antagonist could also be involved in pathogen suppression (Temple et al. 2004; Wensing et al. 2010) However, from this study we can conclude that the production of APV is not the key factor for P. agglomerans Pa48b to out-compete plant pathogens. But, APV could contribute to increase the overall fitness of P. agglomerans. Wensing et al. (2010) showed that the production of siderophores by antagonists support their successful and fast colonization of harsh habitats like plant surfaces. Further studies on the siderophore production of Pa48b and Pa39b will reveal the role of siderophores in the biocontrol of Psg or E. amylovora. The production of secondary metabolites is a necessary tool to compete with plant pathogens secreting effector proteins (van Dijk et al. 1999) and/or phytotoxins (Nüske and Fritsche 1989; Bender et al. 1998; Barzic 1999) that are formed at 18–20°C by different Pseudomonas syringae pathovars typical of cold weather pathogens. Phytotoxins such as phaseolotoxin, coronatine, or persicomycin enable the pathogen to infect the plant and cause damage on plant tissue, implying a severe change in the habitat of epiphytic organisms such as P. agglomerans. Furthermore, temperature fluctuations between day and night could favor APV production at colder nights. Moreover, Pusey and Curry (2004) showed that E. amylovora colonizes apple blossoms even at temperatures between 9 and 14°C which is also the optimal temperature for APV production. Interestingly, the closely related pathogen E. amylovora is even more affected by Pa48b and Pa39b than Psg. In immature pear slice assays, Pa39b inhibited E. amylovora strains more effectively than Pa48b. Considering that Pa39b produces only minimal amounts of APV but five times more enterobactin than Pa48b, this could be involved in pathogen suppression and will be further investigated with siderophore knockout mutants. Furthermore, we showed that both P. agglomerans strains established stable populations on plant surfaces as quickly as the pathogens or faster. We conclude that a rapid colonization of the habitat by the antagonist in a broad temperature range is a major factor for the successful biocontrol of plant pathogens and that the production of secondary metabolites supports that process. The heterogeneity of Pantoea strains that was shown in this study as a result of the production of both antibiotic and siderophores could be useful for biocontrol. A new approach in the application of biocontrol organisms could be to use mixtures of different Pantoea strains which was also discussed by Stockwell et al. (2011). A mixture of biocontrol strains that produce different antibiotics could prevent resistance development in a pathogen population. Moreover, a broader spectrum of secondary metabolites (i.e., siderophores) that are produced by the antagonists could lead to a better adaption to environmental conditions and to reliable pathogen suppression. However, in previous field trials with mixed inocula of the BCOs P. vagans C9-1 and Pseudomonas fluorescens A506 against E. amylovora, it was revealed that there was an incompatibility between the two strains (Stockwell et al. 2010, 2011). An extracellular protease of Pseudomonas fluorescens A506 cleaves pantocin A, an antibiotic of P. vagans C9-1 essential for its biocontrol efficacy (Anderson et al. 2004). We believe that a mixture of Pantoea strains promises less incompatibility problems. We propose for future studies to investigate these strain mixtures in order to get better suppression of fire blight and bacterial blight disease, not only in the laboratory and greenhouse but also under field conditions.