Discussion To dissect the role played by the gliotoxin oxidoreductase, gliT, in self-protection against gliotoxin, a comparative transcriptomic analysis of the impact of exogenous gliotoxin on A. fumigatus wild-type and ∆gliT was carried out via RNA-seq analysis. To reduce the affects of endogenous gliotoxin, a low gliotoxin-producing background strain, A. fumigatus ATCC46645
[2] was employed, along with Sabouraud-Dextrose media which is non-permissive for gliotoxin biosynthesis
[5]. Exogenous gliotoxin exposure resulted in changed expression of 164 genes in A. fumigatus wild-type. However, altered expression of over 1700 genes was observed in A. fumigatus ∆gliT. Closer inspection revealed alterations in expression of clusters encoding secondary metabolites, particularly gliotoxin, helvolic acid, fumitremorgin, fumagillin and pseurotin A biosynthesis genes, siderophore biosynthesis genes, ribosome biogenesis genes and genes involved in translation and nitrogen metabolism. Exogenous gliotoxin induces the expression of gliotoxin biosynthetic genes in both A. fumigatus wild-type and ∆gliT. Expression of gliZ was increased in expression in wild-type, along with gliP, the bimodular non-ribosomal peptide synthetase that produces the cyclo-L-Phe-L-Ser diketopiperazine intermediate
[9, 10, 43]. Up-regulation of gliZ and gliP expression in particular, along with gliF suggests that exogenous gliotoxin induces de novo gliotoxin production in wild-type. Indeed this has been shown to be the case in A. fumigatus Af293 where addition of exogenous gliotoxin under gliotoxin-inducing culture conditions resulted in detection of de novo gliotoxin production determined by the use of [13C]-Phenylalanine and LC-MS analysis. Recently, cyclo-L-Phe-L-Ser was determined to be a major component of the metabolome and was detected in lung tissue of infected mice
[11, 44]. The production of this compound may be increased consequent to exogenous gliotoxin exposure in wild-type due to up-regulation of gliP expression. It has been demonstrated that A. fumigatus gliT expression is not solely under the control of gliZ
[2], and so up-regulation of gliZ expression is not absolutely required to induce gliT expression for the purpose of self-protection. While gliZ expression is not significantly altered in ∆gliT following exogenous gliotoxin exposure in the RNA-seq analysis, qRT-PCR demonstrated increased expression under these conditions. Expression of a number of gli genes was up-regulated in ∆gliT following exogenous gliotoxin exposure, including gliM, which was not altered in wild-type. A. fumigatus gliM is a predicted O-methyltransferase
[3] and methylation has been proposed as a method of self-protection against disulfide bridge-containing metabolites. Holomycin contains a disulfide bridge similar to gliotoxin
[16, 17, 45] and S-methylation has been proposed as an alternative method of self-protection against this antibiotic and its biosynthetic intermediates in S. clavuligerus upon deletion of the dithiol oxidase, HlmI, which is functionally homologous to A. fumigatus gliT
[17, 45]. In Y. ruckeri, an RNA methyltransferase, Hom12, methylates RNA in a proposed self-protection mechanism against the cytotoxic effects of holomycin
[16]. Interestingly, in A. fumigatus ∆gliT following exogenous gliotoxin exposure, a tRNA methyltransferase, AFUA_4G12280, is up-regulated log2 2.56-fold, while its expression is unaltered in wild-type in the presence of exogenous gliotoxin. The increased expression of these methyltransferases, among others, in A. fumigatus ∆gliT following exposure to exogenous gliotoxin may suggest possible alternative functionalities, or self-protection mechanisms against gliotoxin in the absence of GliT. Interestingly, a newly-identified methyltransferase, gliotoxin methyltransferase A (GtmA), has been demonstrated to play a role in attenuating gliotoxin biosynthesis
[46]. GtmA (AFUA_2G11120) expression is significantly up-regulated (p <0.00005) by gliotoxin exposure (Additional file
1). In addition to up-regulation of the gli cluster, dysregulation of other secondary metabolite gene clusters was observed upon exogenous gliotoxin addition, particularly to A. fumigatus ∆gliT. Up-regulated expression of two genes; osc3 and sdrI, from the gene cluster encoding the fusidane antibiotic helvolic acid was observed upon exogenous gliotoxin addition to A. fumigatus wild-type
[25]. However, exogenous gliotoxin addition to A. fumigatus ∆gliT resulted in down-regulated expression of two genes and abrogation of the expression of cyp5081D1, suggesting that gliT deletion, along with exogenous gliotoxin exposure negatively regulates the helvolic acid gene cluster. In an A. fumigatus gliZ complemented strain, helvolic acid production was detectable at 37°C, whereas no helvolic acid was detectable in wild-type or ∆gliZ strains at an identical growth temperature
[10], suggesting that gliZ may be involved in regulating helvolic acid production. Indeed in the present study in wild-type, gliZ expression was up-regulated upon gliotoxin exposure and the helvolic acid biosynthetic genes, including osc3 which encodes the protein that catalyses the first biosynthetic step of helvolic acid biosynthesis
[25], are also up-regulated, whereas in ∆gliT, the helvolic acid biosynthesis genes are down-regulated. However, we cannot unambiguously assign gliZ functionality to hevolic acid production because consistently discrepant gliZ expression data was obtained by RNA-seq and qRT-PCR (Figure 
5). The combined loss of gliT and exposure to exogenous gliotoxin resulted in attenuated expression of the biosynthetic genes for the secondary metabolites: fumitremorgin B, fumagillin, and pseurotin A. Secondary metabolite production in fungi is generally dependant on the presence of a key backbone enzyme, namely a PKS or a NRPS
[47]. In A. fumigatus ∆gliT exposed to exogenous gliotoxin, the NRPS ftmA in the fumitremorgin B cluster, the PKS, fma-PKS in the fumagillin cluster and the PKS-NRPS hybrid psoA/nrps14 in the pseurotin A cluster were all significantly down-regulated suggesting production of these secondary metabolites is also decreased. A. fumigatus ftmA encodes the enzyme required for the first biosynthetic step of fumitremorgin synthesis, the synthesis of the diketopiperazine, brevianamide F
[29], and is significantly down-regulated log2 6.640-fold in A. fumigatus ∆gliT following exogenous gliotoxin addition. Expression of the cytochrome P450 A. fumigatus ftmE, which was absent in ∆gliT exposed to exogenous gliotoxin, encodes the enzyme responsible for formation of fumitremorgin C
[48], while another cytochrome P450, ftmG, which encodes the enzyme that dihydroxylates the fumitremorgin B intermediate was significantly down-regulated log2 6.519-fold
[48]. We hypothesise that fumitremorgin B biosynthesis is decreased, if not abrogated, in A. fumigatus ∆gliT when exposed to exogenous gliotoxin given the decreased expression of genes essential for synthesis. While determination of fumitremorgin B levels was not successful, measurement of fumitremorgin C and related compounds
[48] was carried out in A. fumigatus wild-type and ∆gliT cultured under secondary metabolite-inducing conditions. Significant reductions in the levels of tryprostatin A and tryprostatin B were observed in A. fumigatus ∆gliT compared to wild-type, while there was no significant difference in levels of fumitremorgin C between the two strains. Therefore, GliT loss disrupts the production of brevianamide F, tryprostatin A and tryprostatin B, from the fumitremorgin biosynthetic pathway in A. fumigatus. The PKS, fma-PKS, down-regulated log2 7.287-fold in A. fumigatus ∆gliT, is essential for fumagillin biosynthesis
[30]. Additionally, the C6 type transcription factor fapR/fumR, which controls the expression of the other fumagillin cluster genes
[22], was down-regulated log2 5.826-fold in A. fumigatus ∆gliT following exogenous gliotoxin addition. Decreased expression of these two genes, in addition to others in the biosynthetic gene cluster, suggests down-regulation of fumagillin biosynthesis as a direct consequence of A. fumigatus gliT loss combined with exogenous gliotoxin stress. Indeed supporting the hypothesis of A. fumigatus gliT involvement in facilitating fumagillin biosynthesis, under secondary metabolite-inducing conditions we observed a significant decrease in the production of fumagillin in A. fumigatus ∆gliT compared to wild-type. It has been determined that the biosynthetic genes for fumagillin and pseurotin A are physically intertwined
[27] and these authors also revealed that fapR, which controls expression of the fumagillin biosynthesis genes, also controls the expression of pseurotin A biosynthesis genes
[27]. Indeed, with the exception of one gene, expression of the pseurotin A biosynthetic cluster was significantly down-regulated in A. fumigatus ∆gliT upon exogenous gliotoxin addition. psoA/nrps14 is essential for pseurotin A biosynthesis, as demonstrated by Maiya et al.
[28], while over-expression of this gene increased pseurotin A accumulation. In A. fumigatus ∆gliT exposed to exogenous gliotoxin, psoA/nrps14 expression was down-regulated log2 5.826-fold, while in the proteomic investigation, PsoA/nrps14 was decreased log2 3.032-fold in abundance. In addition to PsoA/nrps14, two other proteins required for pseurotin A biosynthesis
[27] were decreased in abundance upon exogenous gliotoxin exposure in A. fumigatus ∆gliT. PsoF (AFUA_8G00440) and PsoC (AFUA_8G00550) were decreased log2 2.461- and log2 2.016-fold providing further support to the hypothesis that pseurotin A biosynthesis is down-regulated in the absence of A. fumigatus gliT when challenged with exogenous gliotoxin. As was the case with fumagillin, pseurotin A levels were significantly decreased in A. fumigatus ∆gliT compared to wild-type when cultured under secondary metabolite-inducing conditions again suggesting possible GliT involvement in enabling pseurotin A biosynthesis. The biosynthetic gene clusters of fumitremorgin, fumagillin and pseurotin are under the control of the global regulator, A. fumigatus laeA
[26, 27]. A. fumigatus laeA is a methyltransferase and regulates chromatin remodelling through this methyltransferase activity
[26, 32, 49]. In A. fumigatus ∆gliT treated with exogenous gliotoxin, laeA expression was not significantly altered, suggesting that it is not responsible for the down-regulation of these gene clusters. In A. nidulans, LaeA forms a trimeric complex with two members of the velvet protein family; VeA and VelB, and this complex up-regulates secondary metabolism and sexual development
[50]. The complex was subsequently identified and characterised in A. fumigatus
[34]. A. fumigatus veA has been demonstrated to regulate fumagillin and gliotoxin production
[20, 22], however veA expression was not significantly altered in A. fumigatus ∆gliT following exogenous gliotoxin production. The bZip transcriptional enhancer RsmA has been shown to positively regulate gliotoxin biosynthesis
[44], however the expression of A. fumigatus rsmA was not altered significantly in A. fumigatus ∆gliT, in the absence or presence of exogenous gliotoxin. Overall, our findings lead us to postulate that the gliotoxin biosynthetic/self-protection capacity (i.e., GliT functionality) is necessary for optimal biosynthesis of selected secondary metabolites in A. fumigatus. Altered expression of siderophore-iron transport and siderophore biosynthetic genes in both A. fumigatus wild-type and ∆gliT following exogenous gliotoxin exposure suggests a disruption in iron homeostasis or iron sensing. Iron is an essential nutrient that is required for many cellular processes, including as a cofactor for numerous enzymes
[35]. In both wild-type and ∆gliT, siderophore biosynthesis gene expression was up-regulated in response to exogenous gliotoxin indicating that consequent to exogenous gliotoxin exposure, there is an increased requirement for iron despite sufficient iron availability in the culture media, or else a deficit in iron-sensing. A. fumigatus sidF expression was activated in wild-type, while in ∆gliT, sidH expression was activated and that of sidA was up-regulated
[35]. Interestingly, up-regulation of sidA expression has also been observed in ∆metR, an A. fumigatus mutant deficient in the transcription factor that regulates sulfur assimilation, under iron sufficient but sulfur deficient conditions
[21]. Regulatory cross-talk between secondary metabolism and iron requirement has been reported whereby in a laeA mutant deficient in gliotoxin production, decreased expression of a number of the siderophore biosynthesis genes was observed under high iron conditions
[26]. These authors concluded that laeA was also involved in regulating expression of the siderophore biosynthetic genes and in particular, sidD. As discussed, we have observed that the combined effect of exogenous gliotoxin exposure and gliT deletion has a significant impact on secondary metabolism, despite laeA expression being unaffected, and therefore it is interesting that siderophore biosynthesis is also affected. In A. fumigatus wild-type, expression of six siderophore-iron transport genes was up-regulated in response to exogenous gliotoxin, in contrast to up-regulation of two siderophore-iron transport genes in ∆gliT. Interestingly, in ∆gliT, expression of 12 siderophore-iron transport genes was down-regulated. Taken together, this suggests that deletion of gliT in combination with exogenous gliotoxin exposure results in a disruption of, or decrease in, siderophore-iron transport. Amich et al.
[21] noted up-regulation of siderophore-iron transport genes in ∆metR under sulfur-limited but iron replete conditions. Despite observing increased expression of both siderophore biosynthetic genes and siderophore-iron transport genes in ∆metR, suggesting iron starvation, the authors noted increased levels of ferricrocin, the intracellular siderophore that is used for transport and storage
[38, 51]. Iron is utilised in many processes one of which is iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis. Iron-sulfur clusters are inorganic cofactors involved in cellular processes including enzyme activity regulation, mitochondrial respiration, ribosome biosynthesis and cofactor biosynthesis
[52]. Translocation of iron-sulfur clusters requires glutathione, and depletion has been shown to induce an iron starvation-like response in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
[53–55]. It has previously been shown that exogenous gliotoxin exposure to both A. fumigatus wild-type and ∆gliT results in decreased GSH levels
[5] and so it is conceivable that this decrease in cellular GSH could impact on iron homeostasis or iron sensing. A. fumigatus encodes two transcription factors, hapX and sreA, that maintain iron homeostasis whereby hapX represses sreA expression and subsequently iron-consuming pathways, and activates siderophore biosynthesis during iron-starvation, while sreA represses hapX during iron-sufficient conditions in a negative feedback loop
[35, 56]. Interestingly, induction of gliT has been shown before when cultures were shifted from iron-limited to replete conditions in both wild-type and a sreA deletion strain
[57]. Although expression of hapX and sreA is unchanged in both wild-type and ∆gliT upon exogenous gliotoxin exposure, there is significant interplay between gliT, sulfur and iron as demonstrated by the altered expression of siderophore biosynthesis and siderophore-iron transport genes and the decreased GSH levels
[5] in A. fumigatus ∆gliT. FunCat analysis identified significant enrichment of genes involved in nitrogen metabolism in the down-regulated gene set in ∆gliT exposed to exogenous gliotoxin. Fungi can utilise various sources of nitrogen, from easily assimilated sources (e.g., ammonium and glutamate), to more complex secondary sources including amino acids and proteins
[40, 58]. Following exposure to exogenous gliotoxin, the expression of prtT, the conserved regulator of secreted proteases, was decreased and consequentially, a number of proteases previously identified to be under its control were also decreased in expression, including alp1 and pep1
[41]. Additionally, a number of other proteases underwent decreased expression in ∆gliT when exposed to exogenous gliotoxin. These proteases, some of which include dppV, dppVI, cpdS and gprA, have been shown to be induced when BSA is the sole nitrogen source
[41]. In order to conserve energy, fungi will preferentially utilise nitrogen sources that are easily assimilated over complex nitrogen sources
[59]. Sabouraud-Dextrose medium contains a pancreatic digest of casein and a peptic digest of animal tissue. As the media already contained digested proteins, we conclude that expression of these secreted proteases is significantly down-regulated in ∆gliT exposed to exogenous gliotoxin in order to conserve energy. Interestingly, a number of genes involved in amino acid and peptide transport are also decreased in expression with the exception of one amidase, AFUA_5G09140, the expression of which is up-regulated in ∆gliT following exogenous gliotoxin exposure. This was surprising as, despite the availability of amino acids and peptides in the media, the expression of genes encoding enzymes required for uptake of these amino acids and peptides are down-regulated. It is possible that sufficient enzymes are present for adequate uptake of nitrogen sources to compensate for the decreased expression of these genes, or that the down-regulation of these genes is a consequence of the down-regulation of prtT and the other secreted proteases suggesting that there is a decreased nitrogen requirement in ∆gliT, when exposed to exogenous gliotoxin. Loss of A. fumigatus gliT had a significant impact on the transcriptome when challenged with exogenous gliotoxin whereby expression of 1,700 genes was altered, of which 1192 were down-regulated, that was not observed in wild-type where 164 genes had altered expression. This suggests that consequent to GliT absence, transcription is suppressed in the presence of exogenous gliotoxin. This is further supported by the decreased expression of 44 genes involved in transcription processes, many of which are transcription factors. Further to the effects of gliT deletion on transcription, translation is also disrupted in A. fumigatus ∆gliT following exposure to exogenous gliotoxin. Altered expression of genes required for ribosome biogenesis and translation processes was observed in ∆gliT. To support the hypothesis that translation is disrupted, the LFQ proteomic investigation of A. fumigatus ∆gliT did not reflect the large transcriptome changes, as only 6 proteins with increased abundance or uniquely present, and 15 proteins absent or with decreased abundance were identified. It is important to note that despite the low number of proteins altered in abundance, there is agreement between the RNA-seq analysis and the proteomic analysis of A. fumigatus ∆gliT exposed to exogenous gliotoxin, whereby the genes encoding one of the proteins increased in abundance and 8 of the proteins decreased in abundance were up-regulated and down-regulated, respectively.