Discussion The
BLM N-acetyltransferase (BlmB) is a resistance
element found within the blm gene cluster of S. verticillus ATCC15003 that bestows self-resistance to
BLM by acetylating the primary amine of its β-aminoalanine moiety,
the axial ligand of the BLM-metal ion-binding domain. As there are
many examples of bacterial self-resistance elements conferring resistance
to a family of antimicrobial agents,19,38,39 it was surprising to discover BlmB was capable of
acetylating only BLM and not other members of the BLM family of antitumor
antibiotics, particularly PLM, a compound identical to BLM except
for the presence of a thiazolinyl-thiazole moiety instead of the bithiazole
moiety found in BLM.21 A crystal structure
of BlmB implied that a canyonlike groove of three aromatic side chains
is too narrow to accommodate the nonplanar thiazoline ring of PLM.22 Interestingly, the zbm gene
cluster from S. flavoviridis ATCC21892 does not contain
a blmB/tlmB homologue,31 suggesting ZBM, a thiazolinyl-thiazole-containing
analogue of BLM, would not be acetylated by a BlmB-like enzyme. In
this study, we determined whether BlmB and TlmB can acetylate BLM
B2, TLM A, PLM D1, and ZBM, four members of the BLM family, in vitro and investigated the resistance mechanisms of the
ZBM producer S. flavoviridisin vivo. Both BlmB and TlmB acetylate BLM B2, TLM A, PLM D1, and ZBM,
but
only the metal-free forms, in vitro. Although metal-free
BLM as a requirement for BlmB activity was previously stated,22 it appeared to be anecdotal as we found no experimental
evidence in the literature. Comparisons of the BLM structures (Figure 4A),12,22,40 free and enzyme-bound, reveal a probable cause for the lack of acetylation
of the metal-bound forms of BLMs by BlmB and TlmB. When metal is coordinated
to the five nitrogens of BLM, as in the case of the Cu(II)-BLM complex
bound to BlmA or the Co(II)-BLM complex alone, the metal-binding domain
forms a compact conformation. Conversely, BLM in BlmB must adopt an
open conformation allowing the primary amine of BLM access to acetyl-CoA.
The tight conformation of BLM when bound to metal likely precludes
the correct binding orientation in BlmB necessary for catalysis and
prevents BlmB from pulling apart the tightly chelated nitrogen atoms
(Figure 4A). Figure 4(A) Conformations of free and enzyme-bound
BLM reveal its structural
flexibility: (I) free Co(II)-BLM A2 (Protein Data Bank entry 1DEY), (II) Cu(II)-BLM
A2 bound to BlmA (Protein Data Bank entry 1JIF), and (III) BLM A2 bound to BlmB (Protein
Data Bank entry 2ZW7). Enzymes are not shown. Co(II) or Cu(II) atoms are shown as gold
spheres. The five metal-coordinating nitrogens are shown as blue spheres.
For II and III, the bithiazole moieties and C-terminal amines are
cropped at the double wavy lines. The tight conformation of the metal-binding
domain in metal-bound BLM likely prevents BLM from correctly binding
to BlmB for acetylation. (B) Unified model for self-resistance within
the producers of the BLM family of antitumor antibiotics as exemplified
by the BLM producer. Activated BLM (or TLM or ZBM) is generated by
binding to a metal ion [M(II)] and molecular oxygen (O2), which is then reduced to form BLM-M(III)-OOH (black box). Resistance
in the native producer is primarily achieved through sesquestration
by BlmA (thick blue box), while antibiotic modification by BlmB (thin
green box) provides an additional mechanism of resistance. BlmB acetylates
the axial ligand of the BLM metal-binding domain, but only in the
presence of metal-free BLM. Acetylated BLM (Ac-BLM) can bind metal,
but O2 binding or activation is inhibited. BlmA tightly
binds metal-bound BLM, preventing O2 binding and activation.
For the sake of simplicity, the coordinated metal ion is represented
as an M. Members of the BLM family are isolated as Cu(II) complexes;
structures have been determined as Cu or Co complexes, and Fe(II)
must bind before activated BLM is generated. (A) Conformations of free and enzyme-bound
BLM reveal its structural
flexibility: (I) free Co(II)-BLM A2 (Protein Data Bank entry 1DEY), (II) Cu(II)-BLM
A2 bound to BlmA (Protein Data Bank entry 1JIF), and (III) BLM A2 bound to BlmB (Protein
Data Bank entry 2ZW7). Enzymes are not shown. Co(II) or Cu(II) atoms are shown as gold
spheres. The five metal-coordinating nitrogens are shown as blue spheres.
For II and III, the bithiazole moieties and C-terminal amines are
cropped at the double wavy lines. The tight conformation of the metal-binding
domain in metal-bound BLM likely prevents BLM from correctly binding
to BlmB for acetylation. (B) Unified model for self-resistance within
the producers of the BLM family of antitumor antibiotics as exemplified
by the BLM producer. Activated BLM (or TLM or ZBM) is generated by
binding to a metal ion [M(II)] and molecular oxygen (O2), which is then reduced to form BLM-M(III)-OOH (black box). Resistance
in the native producer is primarily achieved through sesquestration
by BlmA (thick blue box), while antibiotic modification by BlmB (thin
green box) provides an additional mechanism of resistance. BlmB acetylates
the axial ligand of the BLM metal-binding domain, but only in the
presence of metal-free BLM. Acetylated BLM (Ac-BLM) can bind metal,
but O2 binding or activation is inhibited. BlmA tightly
binds metal-bound BLM, preventing O2 binding and activation.
For the sake of simplicity, the coordinated metal ion is represented
as an M. Members of the BLM family are isolated as Cu(II) complexes;
structures have been determined as Cu or Co complexes, and Fe(II)
must bind before activated BLM is generated. The BlmB and TlmB enzymes were kinetically characterized
with four
members of the BLM family, each in metal-free forms, and surprisingly,
both the rates (kcat) and Michaelis constants
(KM) for each member were essentially
equivalent. Comparable Michaelis constants indicate each member, regardless
of its differences in structure, binds favorably for the reaction
to occur. Thus, the narrow bithiazole binding groove in BlmB does
not prevent the correct binding orientation necessary for acetylation
to occur in thiazolinyl-thiazole analogues. A sequence alignment of
BlmB and TlmB reveals only two of the three aromatic side chains in
the canyonlike groove are conserved (Figure S9 of the Supporting Information). One could imagine a
Phe/Val substitution, as in the case of BlmB and TlmB, may provide
the necessary space to better accommodate a nonplanar thiazoline ring.
However, neither BlmB nor TlmB shows a preference for bithiazole as
in BLM B2 and TLM A or thiazolinyl-thiazole as in PLM D1 and ZBM,
suggesting the canyonlike groove plays little role in substrate recognition
and specificity. The BLM-binding proteins have long been known
for their sequestration,
and therefore inactivation, of members of the BLM family of antitumor
antibiotics.12,20,41,42 The structure of BlmA, the BLM-binding protein
from S. verticillus ATCC15003, was determined with
bound BLM B2 in both the metal-free and Cu(II)-complexed forms,12 suggesting BlmA can bind either form of BLM
and thus confer resistance in either situation. Given the significant
structural similarity of both BlmA and BLM B2 in both the metal-free
and Cu(II)-complexed forms and the fact that BLMs are isolated as
Cu(II) complexes,15,16,30 BlmA likely preferentially binds metal-bound BLMs in vivo (Figure 4B). As experimentally determined
in this study, BlmB acetylates only the metal-free form of BLMs. As
members of the metal-free forms of the BLM family are incapable of
causing DNA damage,3,43 BlmB and TlmB appear to inactivate
an unharmful form of an antibiotic. Although counterintuitive, covalent
modification of an inactive antibiotic by BlmB or TlmB immediately
after its biosynthesis may provide a preemptive and complementary
mechanism of resistance from self-imposed oxidative damage (Figure 4B) and/or a more stable, yet potentially reversible,
inactivation. It is not clear, however, when and at what level the blmB/tlmB gene is expressed during biosynthesis. We suspect
BlmB or TlmB acts on only the final biosynthetic product, a model
that is consistent with our in vitro data, previously
reported studies,21 and the numerous contacts
BlmB makes with the four functional domains of BLM.22 This hypothesis would rule out BlmB acetylating a biosynthetic
intermediate or precursor. We previously reported that the cloned zbm cluster
from S. flavoviridis ATCC21892 lacks the blmB/tlmB homologue, implying BlmA or TlmA performs the
essential role in BLM resistance.31 We
now establish that S. flavoviridis does not possess
a blmB/tlmB homologue in its genome. S. flavoviridis therefore appears to forego the BlmB resistance
mechanism of antibiotic modification, and ZbmA alone must be sufficient
to provide ZBM resistance. With these findings and the fact that Cu(II)-BLM
complexes are isolated, we now propose that the mechanism of sequestration
by BlmA, TlmA, and ZbmA is the primary mechanism of resistance. BlmB
and TlmB may then be considered as a secondary mechanism of resistance.
Indeed, we show that BlmB can confer resistance to ZBM in
vivo in the ZBM-sensitive S. flavoviridis SB9031 strain and that introduction of BlmB into wild-type S. flavoviridis SB9001 further increases ZBM resistance
as exemplified by the SB9033 strain. The reacquisition of ZBM resistance
in sensitive strain S. flavoviridis SB9031 by expression
of blmB confirms that ZBM can be inactivated by a
BlmB homologue in vivo and proves BlmB can confer
resistance as the sole resistance element. This study highlights
the biochemical functionality and antibiotic
resistance mechanism of the BLM family of antitumor antibiotics by
the BLM N-acetyltransferases. Comparison among the blm, tlm, and zbm gene
clusters exposes the evolutionary relationship between the BlmB and
TlmB N-acetyltransferases and the BlmA-, TlmA-, and
ZbmA-binding proteins as mechanisms of resistance to the BLM family
of drugs. On the basis of this study, we now propose a unified model
for self-resistance within the producers of BLM, TLM, and ZBM, with
BlmA, TlmA, and ZbmA providing the primary mechanism of resistance
and BlmB and TlmB as a secondary additional mechanism of resistance.