DISCUSSION The present crystallographic localization of HygA on the 50S ribosomal subunit together with the biochemical data shed light on the ribosomal binding site and on the molecular mechanism of action of this antibiotic. At the molecular level, the data indicate that the primary mechanism by which HygA inhibits protein synthesis resides in its ability to bind the PTC, in a pocket that overlaps with the binding site of the aminoacyl-ribosyl moiety at the 3′end of the A-site tRNA (Figure 3). As seen in Figure 5A and B we show that although HygA does not prevent the EF-Tu-dependent delivery of the aminoacyl-tRNA to the ribosome, it interferes with the correct positioning of the tRNA on the ribosome. Together we interpret the structural and biochemical data to indicate that HygA allows initial binding of the aminoacyl-tRNA to the 30S A-site but prevents its subsequent accommodation into the 50S A-site by sterically occluding the aminoacyl-ribose moiety from binding within the PTC thus inhibiting peptide bond formation. The interpretation that HygA specifically impedes aminoacyl-tRNA binding into the PTC is in agreement with experiments showing that (i) HygA blocks PT in assays using either the large 50S subunit or the complete 70S ribosome and (ii) HygA inhibits binding to the A site of acceptor mimics to the large subunit, despite the lack of inhibition of larger substrates to the 70S ribosome (Figure 5A) (10,12). As seen in Figure 3 the region of HygA that is structurally related to the aminoacyl-tRNA, does not bind as deeply into the A-site as an aminoacyl-tRNA, but make several interactions with PTC nucleotides that are comparable to the A-site tRNA (Figure 3C–F) and positions critical PTC nucleotides (i.e. U2506, U2585 and A2602) in conformations distinct from the activated PTC conformation induced by canonical A-site substrates (25,26,45). This HygA induced state of the PTC could be an off-pathway conformation unique to the drug or represent an intermediate state normally acquired when canonical A-site substrates bind or exit the A-site that is stabilized by the drug. When the accessibility of the 23S rRNA nucleotides to hydroxyl radical is probed in the presence and absence of HygA, it becomes evident that the binding of HygA affects not just the cleavage pattern of nucleotides located in its vicinity, but also alters the chemical reactivity of nucleotides distant from the binding pocket of HygA (Figure 4). Although at this point we do not have any indication if the alterations observed in the chemical probing experiments may have a secondary role in HygA activity as in fact our results indicate that the main mechanism of action of HygA is to sterically clash with the accommodating A-site tRNA, the altered reactivity of 23S rRNA nucleotides distant from the binding pocket of HygA (i.e. in H89/90/92) could be a side effect of it stabilizing an intermediate state normally transitioned by canonical A-site substrates. In this respect, it is noteworthy that the nucleotides displaying significant changes in reactivity cluster in strategic regions of four helices, H89/H90/H92/H92a (Figure 4) which on the basis of biochemical (48), mutagenesis (49) and molecular dynamics studies (50), have been suggested to function as a communication channel between the PTC and GAR allowing for coordination of the elongation factors EF-Tu and EF-G as a function of the substrates present in and conformation of the PTC (Supplementary Figure S4). A structural basis for the alternation in hydroxyl radical accessibility cannot be extrapolated from the presented structure given that differences can be due to slight changes in the conformation or dynamics of the bases that are not easily assessed in X-ray crystallographic maps at the current resolution. Previous experiments indicated that the binding site of HygA overlaps and/or is incompatible with the binding of other A-site targeting antibiotics like chloramphenicol, lincomycin and macrolides that possess a disaccharide at position 5 of the lactone ring, while the interaction of HygA was found to be compatible with the binding of macrolides that possess a monosaccharide at position 5 of the lactone ring and do not inhibit the PT reaction (10,11). The 50S–HygA structure presented here allows one to rationalize the compatibility between these various drugs. For example, it has been suggested that HygA shares a binding site with chloramphenicol and lincomycin (10). When the 50S–HygA structure is aligned with that of chloramphenicol (CAM; PDB accession code: 1YJN) (51) and clindamycin (CLY), a semisynthetic derivative of lincomycin (PDB accession code: 3OH5) (52,53), CAM and CLY clash with the furanosyl and cinnamic acid moieties of HygA (Supplementary Figure S3A and B). When interactions of CAM with the ribosome are compared with those of HygA, the latter outnumbers the former both in polar and non-polar contacts (Supplementary Figure S3B–E), keeping in line with the finding that HygA binds more strongly to the ribosome and is a more potent inhibitor than CAM (Figure 6A, (10)). Interestingly, although HygA and CAM completely overlap for their binding pocket (Supplementary Figure S3B), they differ in the specific interactions with the rRNA (Supplementary Figure S3C–E) such that a 23S rRNA mutation, G2061A (47), confers resistance to CAM but not HygA (Figure 6B). Concerning the macrolide antibiotics it has been observed that they interfere with the binding of HygA to a greater extent if a disaccharide is linked to position 5 of the lactone ring (11). Superpositioning the 50S–HygA structure with that of representative macrolides (Supplementary Figure S5) (54), allows one to rationalize these observations (11). For example, the mycarose moiety in the disaccharide extension of both carbomycin and spiramycin (PDB accession codes: 1K8A and 1KD1, respectively; (54)) encroaches on the HygA binding site (Supplementary Figure S5B and C). In the case of spiramycin the overlap mainly concerns the furanose moiety while in the case of carbomycin the overlap extends to both the furanosyl and cinnamic acid moieties of HygA (Supplementary Figure S5B and C). This is in good agreement with the observed ability of spiramycin to reduce the binding of HygA while carbomycin completely prevents it although both drugs contain a disaccharide in position 5 of the lactone ring (11). On the contrary, erythromycin, which has only a monosaccharide at the position 5 of the lactone ring and therefore does not extend into the PTC, does not overlap with HygA (PDB accession code: 3OFR; Supplementary Figure S5D; (53)) and shows compatible binding with HygA (Supplementary Figure S5D and (11)). This understanding is important for designing new antibiotics based on the HygA and/or macrolide backbone. The presented HygA structure is largely consistent with previous work detailing the drugs structure-activity relationships. Namely, such studies show that the furanose moiety can be substituted with short lipophilic chains (8,55,56), which reflects the fact that although contributing to the interaction of the drug with the ribosome this moiety does not overlap with the A-site substrate and thus does not directly play a role in drug's inhibiting activity. If the furanose moiety is maintained, the tight packing of the 2″ and 3″ hydroxyl groups with the walls of the pocket is in agreement with previous work showing that the 3″ OH is essential (55) and the 2″ OH is phosphorylated in the HygA producing organism in one of several possible mechanisms of self-resistance (14). Furthermore the acetyl group of the furanose moiety is amendable to modification (as seen with compounds 5″-dihydrohygromycin A) (57), which is in agreement with the fact that this group extends into the lumen of the ribosomal tunnel. In the cinnamic acid moiety the strict steric requirements imposed on active substituents (8,58,59) is supported by the structure which indicates this moiety is tightly surrounded on one face by the 23S rRNA and on the other by the P-site bound tRNA (as inferred by aligning structures harboring P-site substrates to that of the HygA structure). The observation by Palaniappan et
al. (60) that desmethylhygromycin and methoxyhygromycin display an in vitro activity comparable to HygA suggests that the ring structure of the methylenedioxy in the aminocyclitol moiety is not strictly required for ribosome interaction. In fact the potential hydrogen bonds observed between O5 with the amine N4 of C2573 and between O4 with the amine N2 of G2583 in the HygA-50S structure would be similarly possible for the desmethylhygromycin and methoxyhygromycin derivatives. In conclusion this study indicates that HygA has a distinct ribosomal interaction, induces a unique PTC conformation and thus employs a distinctive molecular strategy to block protein synthesis. This information is critical to developing new antibiotics with improved pharmacokinetics and reduced sensitivities to existing resistance mechanisms by building on existing anti-infective frameworks.