DISCUSSION Although orf1 is the second azinomycin resistance gene found in S. sahachiroi, gene inactivation experiments reported here have demonstrated that it is essential for azinomycin production. In contrast to the other resistance protein AziR which acts by binding to the drug, the Orf1 may act as a new DNA glycosylase to confer azinomycin resistance. To better elucidate the mode of action of Orf1, probable interactions among drug (azinomycin B), target (DNA) and resistance protein (Orf1) were intensively analyzed and are illustrated in Figure 6A. Orf1 may confer the azinomycin resistance through drug binding (a), site protection (b) and/or DNA repair (c). Based on its DNA binding ability, the site protection strategy via protein–DNA interaction was first put forward. It may sound inconceivable for Orf1 to protect millions of potential target sites in a Streptomyces genome. The number of target sites susceptible to azinomycin B attack is, in fact, much lower than expected, due to the high density of chromosome structure and binding of nucleoid-associated proteins (31). Moreover, the aziE which is located within the azinomycin B gene cluster and encodes a putative export protein, was found to be employed in the drug efflux system (Wang Shan & Jing He, unpublished). Drug sequestration associated with efficient efflux systems which plays an important role in bacterial self-protection, maintains a low concentration of intracellular drug (32). The relatively fewer target sites, plus low drug concentrations in bacterial cells, are propitious conditions for Orf1 to implement efficacious site protection. This supposition was further supported by in vivo ChIP and in vitro DNA protection assays. Neither drug binding nor drug inactivation was identified by in vitro experiments, which both ruled out direct Orf1/drug interactions. Our studies in vitro subsequently discovered the DNA repair capability of Orf1, which is the most intriguing result of our observation. Figure 6.Proposed action modes of Orf1. (A) Three strategies might be adopted by Orf1 to resist azinomycin B. (a) Drug binding. Orf1 binds azinomycin B and sequesters it from target DNA. (b) Site protection. Binding of Orf1 occupies target sites and protects them from the drug. (c) DNA repair. Orf1 binds interstrand cross-linked DNA and repairs DNA damage. (B) Schematic diagrams of three proposed mechanisms for ICL DNA repair by Orf1: (1) Orf1 makes an incision at phosphodiester backbones of azinomycin B-adducted DNA; (2) Orf1 binds to azinomycin B modified double-stranded DNA region and consequently releases azinomycin B from the adducted base without incision of DNA; (3) Orf1 cleaves the N-glycoside bond of the damaged base to liberate an abasic site. In the diagram, ‘P’ indicates phosphate group and ‘a’ indicates abasic site. (C) The BER-like repair mechanism initiated by Orf1. Proposed action modes of Orf1. (A) Three strategies might be adopted by Orf1 to resist azinomycin B. (a) Drug binding. Orf1 binds azinomycin B and sequesters it from target DNA. (b) Site protection. Binding of Orf1 occupies target sites and protects them from the drug. (c) DNA repair. Orf1 binds interstrand cross-linked DNA and repairs DNA damage. (B) Schematic diagrams of three proposed mechanisms for ICL DNA repair by Orf1: (1) Orf1 makes an incision at phosphodiester backbones of azinomycin B-adducted DNA; (2) Orf1 binds to azinomycin B modified double-stranded DNA region and consequently releases azinomycin B from the adducted base without incision of DNA; (3) Orf1 cleaves the N-glycoside bond of the damaged base to liberate an abasic site. In the diagram, ‘P’ indicates phosphate group and ‘a’ indicates abasic site. (C) The BER-like repair mechanism initiated by Orf1. To our knowledge, three mechanisms exist to repair DNA alkylating/cross-linking damages (Figure 6B). Among them, NER is the most common mechanism that could remove ICL lesions induced by a variety of antitumor antibiotics such as anthramycin and mitomycin C (33,34) by using the UvrABC endonuclease enzyme complex in E. coli cells. The excision of the adducted nucleotide is performed with the UvrA recognizing the helix-distorting lesion, the UvrB unwinding the damaged region, and the UvrC cleaving the phosphodiester bonds near the lesion (35,36). An additional matter of interest is that UvrA and UvrB proteins are capable of repairing the helix-stabilizing anthramycin-N2 guanine DNA adducts in an alternative way: UvrA coupled with UvrB strongly binds DNA and releases DNA-bound anthramycin without incision of DNA (37). A few homologs of UvrA proteins are found to confer self-resistance toward DNA-targeting drugs in antibiotics-producing bacteria. For example, UvrA-like proteins derived from chromomycin A3 (38) and the enediyne antitumor antibiotic C-1027 (39) biosynthetic gene clusters have been reported to participate in self-resistance of the corresponding drugs. The daunorubicin resistance protein (DrrC) in Streptomyces peucetius was speculated to bind within DNA regions intercalated by daunorubicin and release pre-bound drug to prevent DNA damage, due to its sequence homology and similar DNA binding properties with UvrA. The drrC, as well as orf1, is vital to self-resistance and antibiotic production. Moreover, as previously reported, inactivation of drrC was only accomplished in non-antibiotic-producing conditions. The DNA binding activity of DrrC is mediated by ATP and enhanced by daunorubicin (DNR) (40,41), while interaction of Orf1 and DNA is independent of ATP and unaffected by azinomycin B (Figure 4C and Supplementary Figure S4A). Pyrimidine dimers and many of alkylation lesions are commonly repaired by direct reversal as the second repair mechanism in Figure 6B, but which is rarely seen in the removal of DNA ICL and drug self-resistance (42). The last but particularly important mechanism is BER, which repairs small, non-helix distorting base lesions like oxidation, alkylation and deamination (43). Recently, YtKR2, a DNA glycosylase homologous protein, was first reported to confer self-resistance toward a DNA-targeting antibiotic by triggering the BER system (44), which removes N3-YTM-alkylated adenine from monoadduct induced by yatakemycin (YTM). Shortly afterward, our study also found out the Orf1 protein, involved in self-resistance to azinomycin B, possesses DNA glycosylase-like activity. BER is normally initiated by DNA glycosylases and further processed by AP endonucleases. Monofunctional glycosylases only remove damaged base by cleaving the N-glycoside bond to liberate an AP site, whereas bifunctional glycosylases possess an extra AP lyase activity that hydrolyzes the phosphodiester bond 3′ to the AP site. Orf1 is supposed to be a novel type of monofunctional glycosylases because it only catalyzed base excision in ICL DNA cleavage assay in vitro. Orf1 specifically recognizes interstrand azinomycin B-DNA crosslinks and removes modified bases located on the two DNA strands, forming apurinic (AP) sites. The ubiquitous AP endonucleases in cells cleave the phosphodiester bond near the AP site to generate a 3′ hydroxyl group adjacent to 5′ deoxyribosephosphate (dRP). DNA polymerase then removes the damaged region using its 5′ to 3′ exonuclease activity and resynthesizes the missing part using the complementary strand as a template. Considering that BER is usually implicated in the elimination of mono-functional alkylation, we speculate that removal of monoadducts prior to crosslink formation seems to be more rational within the cell. The Orf1 protein minimizes the amount of azinomycin B bound to genomic DNA and repairs incidental alkylation to ensure efficient protection. As a protein has the typical domain architecture of HTH_42, Orf1 is the first member of this superfamily to have a defined biological function in bacterial self-resistance identified. Contrary to most regulatory proteins with HTH motifs, we have shown Orf1 binds to DNA irrespective of any particular sequence. This kind of DNA binding pattern is commonly observed in nucleoid-associated proteins (NAPs) including histone-like DNA-binding proteins (HLPs) and high-mobility group proteins (HMGs) (45–47). The E. coli HU protein, a well-documented NAP, binds linear DNA fragments with low affinity and this binding was only detectable in vitro under low salt conditions (48,49). High concentration of NaCl (up to 150 mM), however, had no effect on the formation and mobility of the Orf1-DNA complex (Supplementary Figure S4B). Moreover, HU protein was found to bind specifically to DNA recombination and repair intermediates with high affinity although it binds to DNA duplex without sequence specificity. This structure-specific manner also occurred in the binding of Orf1 to the azinomycin B modified DNA. NAPs are usually considered to be involved in all DNA-dependent functions, including replication, repair, recombination and gene regulation (50). A novel bifunctional NAP identified in Streptomyces has recently been shown to modulate DNA conformation and transcription during development and stress (47). There were no obvious difference in phenotypic characteristics of colony morphology, spore formation and growth rate between the non-azinomycin-producing strain ΔaziU3 and the orf1 gene deletion mutant strain ΔaziU3Δorf1 observed. Thus Orf1 may not be involved in primary metabolism, but specific to the secondary metabolic pathway of azinomycin B. Taken altogether, our present study revealed a novel DNA glycosylase, which could confer resistance in azinomycin B biosynthesis via distinct DNA binding ability and DNA repair capability. Intensive biochemical and structural biology studies of Orf1 will not only elucidate its enzymatic characteristics but also provide insight into the unique structure-function relationship of these newly found HTH_42 superfamily proteins.