Discussion Although many secondary metabolites of streptomycetes have been discovered, they were most often isolated from the stationary phase of growth, i.e., in the context of the formation of aerial mycelium (Janecek et al., 1997; Kieser et al., 2000; van Keulen and Dyson, 2014). However, our in silico search within the gene expression data (Strakova et al., 2013; Bobek et al., 2014) revealed a number of genes (including those cryptic) responsible for the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites to be expressed during the course of S. coelicolor's germination (see Table 1); especially genes responsible for the synthesis of desferrioxamines (sco2783-2784), gray spore pigment (sco5314, sco5318, sco5320), or yellow coelimycin P1 (sco6273-6276, sco6277-6287, so called cpk cryptic gene cluster) (Lakey et al., 1983; Gomez-Escribano et al., 2012). We therefore focused our work on whether germinating spores are capable of activating the respective biosynthetic pathways and producing any compound within the 6 h of germination. Metabolites that could be bound to the spore surface or present in germination medium were identified by means of the LC-MS analysis. Simultaneously, the secondary metabolites produced during the sporulation phase and those associated with the dormant spores were also included in the analysis in order to state whether the compounds found in the samples from germlings were synthesized de novo. The cultivations were carried out in three different liquid media (R3, NMMP, and AM, see Methods). The nutritionally rich medium R3 was chosen for the capacity of S. coelicolor to produce a number of structurally distinct secondary metabolites in it, such as actinorhodin (Shima et al., 1996) or coelimycin P1 (Gomez-Escribano et al., 2012). In contrast to the R3 medium, the minimal liquid medium NMMP, a poorer medium in which streptomycetes produce fewer secondary metabolites (Hodgson, 1982), was also used. The reason is that NMMP enables the testing of the effects of various ions and nutrients on the production of secondary metabolites. The AM medium containing 20 amino acids was also implemented into our experiments as it had been specifically designed for germination experiments and was used throughout the whole genome expression analyses (Bobek et al., 2004; Strakova et al., 2013). It is known that the presence of different carbon and energy sources in the medium qualitatively affects secondary metabolism (Janecek et al., 1997). That is why the presence of various sugars—glucose, glycerol, and mannitol—in all three media types was tested. In accordance with previously published data (Kieser et al., 2000), both glycerol and mannitol were revealed to be a more suitable source of carbon for secondary metabolites production in the R3 medium in our experiments. Mannitol and glucose exhibited a higher capacity for secondary metabolism when NMMP medium was used and glycerol was shown to have a higher capacity in cases where AM medium was used. Our results also showed that both nutritionally richer media R3 and AM are more suited to germination and the production of secondary metabolites than the minimal NMMP medium, probably due to the presence of Ca2+ ions (Eaton and Ensign, 1980; Lakey et al., 1983), L-amino acids (Hirsch and Ensign, 1976b), or various carbon sources (Romero-Rodriguez et al., 2016) in the richer media. The elution methods with ethylacetate (Rajan and Kannabiran, 2014) or the QuEChERS (Schenck and Hobbs, 2004) were not the most appropriate for isolation of secondary metabolites. Therefore, solid phase extraction (Kamenik et al., 2010) was applied with optimization for streptomycete secondary metabolites. These extracts from supernatants of S. coelicolor's cultures were used for LC-MS analyses. Secondary metabolites of S. coelicolor not produced during germination Most of the secondary metabolites, whose biosynthetic genes had previously been shown to be expressed during germination (Strakova et al., 2013), were not detected in samples from germination. These include 21 genes (including sco3230-3232 that encode CDA peptide-synthetase I-III) from the cda gene cluster [encoding synthesis of the calcium-dependent-antibiotic (CDA)], the cryptic gene cluster cpk (genes sco6273-6288, encoding synthesis of a polyketide antibiotic coelimycin P1), genes sco5314, sco5318, and sco5320 (encoding synthesis of the gray spore pigment), and genes sco5877-5878, sco5881, sco5891-5894, and sco5898 from the so-called red gene cluster (encoding synthesis of undecylprodigiosin), and genes sco2783-2784 from the desABCD cluster (sco2782-2785, controlling the synthesis of desferrioxamines). Despite the respective gene expression, biosynthesis of more complex secondary metabolites may not occur, since gene expression is only a requirement for biosynthesis and not evidence of it actually taking place. On the other hand, we found two actinorhodin congeners - actinorhodinic acid and γ-actinorhodin (Bystrykh et al., 1996; Okamoto et al., 2009) in all tested developmental phases, i.e., stationary phase, dormant and germinating spores. In germinating spores, expression of several involved genes: sco5072-5086, sco5088, and sco5090 had been found (Strakova et al., 2013). Despite the detected expression, we cannot exclude the possibility that the presence of actinorhodin originates from the stationary phase rather than from de novo synthesis in germination (therefore the compounds are not listed in Table 3). The reason is that actinorhodin (as well as other aromatic pigments derived from the type II and type III polyketide synthases) is known to be bound on the spore envelopes throughout dormancy (Davis and Chater, 1990; Bystrykh et al., 1996; Funa et al., 1999; Tahlan et al., 2007). This was also confirmed by the actinorhodin detection in our samples of dormant spores even after several washings. Secondary metabolites of S. coelicolor produced during germination The latest study on the topic (Xu and Vetsigian, 2017) concludes that the germination of S. coelicolor M145 may be positively or negatively affected by unknown substances produced by the germlings themselves or by other streptomyces species (e.g., S. venezuelae). The results presented here unveiled that S. coelicolor produces three secondary metabolites during germination, belonging to the terpenoids (albaflavenone) and polyketides (germicidin A, chalcone). As these compounds have not been detected in dormant spore extracts, we assume that they are produced de novo during germination. They show a variety of biological effects and thus perhaps help S. coelicolor suppress competitive microflora or coordinate its own development at the early stage of development. The biosynthetic pathways of the detected substances encompass only a few simple reaction steps that do not require complicated precursors and whose biosynthetic genes are expressed during germination, as can be found in gene expression data (Strakova et al., 2013). In contrast, structurally complex metabolites (like the CDA) were not detected in germination (see above). Albaflavenone Tricyclic sesquiterpenoid albaflavenone has an aroma similar to geosmin (Gerber and Lechevalier, 1965; Gurtler et al., 1994). Its biosynthesis requires only two genes: sco5222-5223 (Moody et al., 2012). The expression of these genes can be suppressed by cAMP-receptor protein, Crp, which also occurs in other bacteria (e.g., in Escherichia coli). The cAMP-Crp control system is a key regulator of germination, secondary metabolism, and further development of S. coelicolor (Derouaux et al., 2004; Gao et al., 2012; Bobek et al., 2017). The system also influences the expression of biosynthetic gene clusters in S. coelicolor that extend beyond albaflavenone actinorhodin, prodigiosin, CDA, and coelimycin (Gao et al., 2012). So far, the production of albaflavone in streptomycetes has been described only in the stationary growth in S. albidoflavus (Gurtler et al., 1994), S. coelicolor, S. viridochromogenes, S. avermitilis, S. griseoflavus, S. Ghanaensis, and S. albus (Moody et al., 2012). However, the expression data analysis shows that the gene sco5223 is activated in germination (Strakova et al., 2013), indicating the possible formation of this metabolite during the initial 6 h of cultivation. We actually found a substance corresponding to albaflavenone in the germination sample in the AM medium with glycerol. The compound was also detected in samples from the stationary phase (positive control in R3 medium with glycerol), but not samples from dormant spores, indicating its germination-associated de novo synthesis. Albaflavenone is not commercially available, which is why we used hexane extracts, where the compound was detected by LC-MS, for testing its biological activities. We did not see any effect, however. On the other hand, it can be assumed that the albaflavenone produced during the germination provides an advantage in a highly competitive soil environment because it has a demonstrable antibacterial effect on Bacillus subtilis at the concentration of 8 μg mL−1 (Gurtler et al., 1994). Moreover, if albaflavenone was incorporated into the hydrophobic envelope of spores, as other terpenoids do incorporate into the lipophilic membrane layers, it would affect the permeability of the envelopes leading to an intense water influx into spores, thereby accelerating their germination. If we reason that the thickness of the hydrophobic spore envelope is not unified (Lee and Rho, 1993), then the water influx comes into different spores in a different intensity, and therefore, naturally, germination is a non-synchronous process (Hirsch and Ensign, 1976a; Xu and Vetsigian, 2017). The spores already germinated would produce albaflavenone as a signal that environmental conditions are appropriate for the growth of the whole population. β-farnesene is a sesquiterpene relative to albaflavenone with a wide range of bioactivities (Gibson and Pickett, 1983; Avé et al., 1987) that serves as a precursor of a number of biosynthetic pathways, including the geosmin synthesis. The synthesis of both albaflavenone and β-farnesene is dependent on the type of activity carried out by cytochrome P450 (CYP170A1). It may function either as P450 monooxygenase or as P420 farnesene-synthase. It has been shown that the farnesene-synthase activity predominates at pH 5.5–6.5 and in the presence of bivalent cations (Mg2+, Mn2+, Ca2+), while at pH 7.0–8.2, it functions as the monooxygenase, oxidizing epi-isozizaen first to albaflavenol, and then to albaflavenone (Moody et al., 2012). Conformation and final enzymatic activity of CYP170A1 is thus affected by the pH of the environment. We presume that S. coelicolor may exploit the dual pH-dependent activity of the enzyme in order to detect optimal external conditions. Therefore, we tested whether the biosynthetic activity is dependent on the pH of the medium during germination. For the experiment we performed the same R3 medium with a pH of either 7.2 or 6.0. Although we were not able to directly demonstrate the production of β-farnesene, we proved that the spectrum of detected substances significantly differed. Further experiments are required to confirm the expected pH-dependent signaling activity of the albaflavenon/β-farnesene systems. Germicidin A Gcs protein (a polyketide synthase type III, PKS III) is involved in the germicidin biosynthesis in S. coelicolor (Chemler et al., 2012). However, expression of its gene sco7221 during germination was below the detection limit (Strakova et al., 2013). The germicidin biosynthesis could also be related to the activity of other genes sco7670-7671, whose expression is active in germination (Strakova et al., 2013). Germicidin A production has previously been described in germination spores and in the stationary growth stage of S. viridochromogenes (Hirsch and Ensign, 1978; Petersen et al., 1993). It was also isolated after more than 24 h of submerged cultivation of S. coelicolor and other streptomyces (Petersen et al., 1993; Aoki et al., 2011; Ma et al., 2017). The results of our work, however, show for the first time that germicidin A is produced by germlings of S. coelicolor (in R3 medium with glycerol or mannitol, and in AM medium with glucose or glycerol). In contrast, germicidin B in germinating S. coelicolor was not produced, which is consistent with the results reported in S. viridochromogenes (Petersen et al., 1993). On the other hand, both polyketides, germicidin A and germicidin B, were detected here in samples from the stationary phase (in both, R3 medium with glycerol, or mannitol and NMMP medium with glucose or mannitol). Germicidins belong to a richly represented group of α-pyrone natural substances found in bacteria, fungi, plants, and animals (Schaberle, 2016). Pyrones have many biological effects and signal molecules for quorum sensing can be found among them (Brachmann et al., 2013). Germicidin A is a known reversible inhibitor of spore germination; it prevents the germination at very low concentrations of 40 pg mL−1; i.e., only 2,400 molecules per spore (Petersen et al., 1993). We verified this biological effect in S. coelicolor, where germicidin A had a marked adverse effect on germination already at as low a concentration in medium as 4 μg mL−1. It is known that germicidin A affects the respiration of spores and mycelia by interacting with the membrane Ca2+-ATPase, inactivating the enzyme. By this mechanism, germicidin not only prevents spores from generating sufficient energy for germination but also inhibits hyphal growth (Eaton and Ensign, 1980; Grund and Ensign, 1985; Aoki et al., 2011). Germicidin A also exhibits antibacterial activity against gram-positive bacteria such as Bacillus subtilis, Arthrobacter crystallopoietes, or Mycobacterium smegmatis (Grund and Ensign, 1985; Aoki et al., 2011). Because of its inhibitory effect, the production of germicidin during germination in optimal conditions might, at first glance, seem surprising. Its production by germinating spores might help to co-ordinate germination within the population. Its self-regulating function could maintain a portion of spores in their dormant state for a prolonged period as a reserve if the environment proves to be unfavorable or when germination occurs in higher spore densities. Conversely, the ungerminated spores can be further propagated in the environment and, after overcoming the reversible inhibition, can spread in new niches. Chalcone The detection of chalcone in Streptomyces has not yet been proven to our knowledge. Its tentative identification presented here is based on the accurate mass of analyzed supernatants from the stationary phase and germination in R3 medium with glycerol or mannitol. Chalcones are intermediates of flavonoid biosynthesis where the key role in their synthesis plays 1,3,6,8-tetrahydroxynaphthalene-synthase. One of its precursors is the naringenin-chalcone, whose involvement in the flavonoid naringenin biosynthesis was described in S. clavuligerus (Alvarez-Alvarez et al., 2015). The enzyme, which belongs to PKS III, is closely related to the plant chalcone synthase (Izumikawa et al., 2003). Its sco1206 gene in S. coelicolor is expressed during germination (Strakova et al., 2013). Chalcone is apparently an instrument of interspecies interaction, as there are referred its antifungal, phytotoxic and insecticidal effects are outlined (Diaz-Tielas et al., 2012). Chalcone could also function as a signaling molecule in a symbiotic relationship, such as 4,4′-dihydroxy-2′-methoxychalcone produced by legumes that induce transcription of nod genes in symbiotic rhizobacteria. The products of these genes, Nod factors, are involved in the symbiosis where rhizobacteria produce nitrogen for plants (Maxwell et al., 1989). Interestingly, other flavonoids - quercetin, kaempferol, and myricetin—are known to stimulate pollen germination in Nicotiana tabacum L. (Ylstra et al., 1992). Therefore, we expected that chalcones produced by germinating spores would stimulate germination under favorable environmental conditions. Experimentally, however, we verified the opposite as the chalcone of S. coelicolor remarkably inhibited germination. At a concentration of 300 μg mL−1, it completely suppressed growth and at 8 μg mL−1 and lower the compound visibly inhibited spore germination, colony differentiation, and actinorhodin production on solid medium. Electron microscopic images taken from liquid cultivation revealed disrupted germ tubes. This finding correlates with a described activity of chalcone which was shown to interfere with cell membrane of Staphylococcus aureus (Sivakumar et al., 2009).