DISCUSSION It has been known for decades that spontaneous Gac− mutants accumulate in nutrient-rich cultures of some Pseudomonas spp. (17, 21, 22, 25, 26, 38–41), but the reasons for this phenomenon have remained obscure. In this study, we focused on P. protegens Pf-5, which accumulated a very high proportion of Gac− mutants in NYB, outnumbering wild-type cells by at least 9:1 in 6-day cultures (Fig. 2A). P. protegens Pf-5 is also known for the production of a large number of secondary metabolites (32, 34, 42). The results of this study showed that secondary metabolism influences the accumulation of spontaneous Gac− mutants in cultures of P. protegens Pf-5. The study also showed that secondary metabolism does not have a uniform role in the evolution of P. protegens Pf-5. Of six secondary metabolic pathways possessed by strain Pf-5, only two (pyoluteorin and orfamide A pathways) had a significant influence on the accumulation of Gac− mutants, determined by evaluating a series of mutants deficient in production of one or six of the secondary metabolites. Rhizoxin and 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol were not produced to detectable levels in NYB medium, so it is possible that the production of these secondary metabolites could influence the proportion of Gac− mutants of Pf-5 in a different medium. However, no Gac− mutants were detected when strain Pf-5 was cultured in NBG, which is conductive to 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol production (36), indicating that production of 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol may not influence the accumulation of Gac− mutants. Pyrrolnitrin was produced by strain Pf-5 on NYB (see Fig. S1C in the supplemental material), but the ΔprnC mutant did not differ from the wild type in the accumulation of Gac− mutants (Fig. 3A). These results suggest that secondary metabolism does not have a uniform role in the accumulation of Gac− mutants. Of the two secondary metabolites that influenced the accumulation of Gac− mutants of Pf-5 in NYB medium, our study focused on pyoluteorin. A mutant deficient in pyoluteorin biosynthesis accumulated spontaneous Gac− mutations to a level that is significantly lower than that of the wild type (Fig. 3), so we initially hypothesized that the compound pyoluteorin enhances the accumulation of Gac− mutants. Contrary to this expectation, the addition of purified pyoluteorin to cultures of a ΔpltA mutant or wild-type Pf-5 decreased the proportion of Gac− mutants in the culture (Fig. 4). These results suggest that the process of pyoluteorin production, instead of the pyoluteorin compound, contributes to the accumulation of spontaneous Gac− mutants. One possible explanation for these results is that the biosynthesis of pyoluteorin imposes a metabolic load on the bacterial cell such that Gac− mutants, relieved of that metabolic load, have a fitness advantage over the wild type in culture. In support of this explanation, a derivative of P. protegens Pf-5 (pltR* ΔpltA mutant) that overexpressed the pyoluteorin biosynthesis genes but did not synthesize pyoluteorin, accumulated a high proportion of Gac− mutants (Fig. 5B). Therefore, increasing the expression of pyoluteorin biosynthesis genes, which presumably increased the metabolic load on the cell, resulted in enhanced accumulation of the Gac− mutants. These results support the idea that the fitness disadvantage of the wild type to Gac− mutants in culture (Fig. 2) is due to the metabolic load imposed by pyoluteorin synthesis in the wild type, which is absent in the mutants. We recognize that several alternative explanations for our results exist. For example, we evaluated the possibility that the Gac− mutants and wild-type Pf-5 differ in sensitivity to pyoluteorin, which could impose a selective pressure on the relative abundance of the two genotypes; however, no detectable difference was observed in pyoluteorin sensitivities of Gac− mutants versus wild-type Pf-5 (Fig. S3). It is also possible that intermediates accumulated during pyoluteorin biosynthesis (Fig. S4) could influence the relative fitness of Gac− mutants versus wild-type cells in culture. Pyoluteorin is composed of a pyrrole moiety, which is synthesized via a nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS), and a resorcinol ring synthesized by a polyketide synthase (PKS). Of the eight enzymes (PltLABCDEFG [Fig. S4A]) required for the biosynthesis of pyoluteorin (30), two (PltE and PltF [Fig. S4B]) synthesize the pyrrolyl-2-thioester on the peptidyl carrier protein PltL (43). Two chlorines are added to the pyrrolyl substrate on the carrier protein scaffold by the FADH2-dependent halogenase PltA (44). The dichloropyrrolyl-S-PltL is the likely substrate for the PKS steps catalyzed by PltB and PltC, in which malonyl-coenzyme A (CoA) monomers are added to an elongating carbon chain, released from the PKS by the thioesterase PltG, and cyclized to form the resorcinol ring (30). The mutation of pltA used in this study is not expected to interfere with the expression of downstream genes because a promoter is predicted upstream of pltB (45). The PltA substrate is pyrrolyl-S-PltL (Fig. S4B), which is tethered to the peptidyl carrier protein so is unlikely to accumulate in the cytosol of the ΔpltA mutant (44). Therefore, it is unlikely that the pltA mutation causes an increased concentration of an intermediate that influences the accumulation of Gac− mutants in cultures of Pf-5. In wild-type Pf-5, the dichlorinated pyrrole is proposed to be transferred from PltL to the acyl carrier protein domains in the polyketide synthases PltB and PltC. The dichlorinated pyrrole, which is present in wild-type Pf-5 and absent in the ΔpltA mutant, is not thought to be released into the cytosol (44), so it is unlikely to influence the proportion of Gac− mutants in cultures of P. protegens Pf-5. On the basis of the current model for pyoluteorin biosynthesis, it seems unlikely that a pathway intermediate is responsible for the accumulation of Gac− mutants in cultures of strain Pf-5, but the model has not yet been fully evaluated in vivo. Therefore, we cannot exclude the possibility that an intermediate(s) in pyoluteorin biosynthesis, which is not present in the ΔpltA mutant, contributes to the differential fitness of Gac− mutants and wild-type Pf-5 in NYB cultures. Our recent work also showed that the intermediates of secondary metabolic pathways can function as signals regulating gene expression of P. protegens (10, 36, 46). Future experiments are needed to investigate the possible contribution of intermediates in pyoluteorin biosynthesis to the accumulation of spontaneous Gac− mutants. (A and B) Diagrams of the pyoluteorin biosynthetic gene cluster (A) and the proposed biosynthetic pathway (B) of P. protegens Pf-5. Arrows represent gene locations and orientations in the biosynthetic gene clusters and are colored according to their functions. These diagrams were modified from previous work (10, 43, 44). Download FIG S4, TIF file, 0.1 MB. Bacteria living in natural environments must compete with other organisms for nutrients and space, and competition is often a strong selective pressure influencing bacterial evolution. In this study, the proportion of spontaneous Gac− mutants in cultures of P. protegens Pf-5 was higher in pure culture than in coculture with B. subtilis (Fig. 6B). From these results, we speculate that phenotype(s) positively regulated by GacS-GacA were required for P. protegens Pf-5 to compete successfully with B. subtilis. Indeed, strain Pf-5 inhibited growth of B. subtilis on NYA, whereas a ΔgacA mutant showed much less inhibition (Fig. 6A). Production of pyoluteorin, which is positively controlled by GacS-GacA (15), is required for full inhibition of B. subtilis (Fig. S5). Also, the population size of strain Pf-5 was similar in pure culture or coculture with B. subtilis, whereas the population size of a ΔgacA mutant was significantly higher in pure culture than in coculture with B. subtilis (Fig. 6C). Consistent with our results, it has been reported that a ΔgacA mutant of P. aureofaciens 30-84 has a competitive advantage against the wild type in sterile rhizosphere soil, but the wild type has a competitive advantage in natural rhizosphere soil, where the bacteria must compete with other organisms (22). Taken together, these results indicate that competitive pressure influences the evolution of these Pseudomonas species, favoring wild-type cells and reducing the proportion of spontaneous Gac− mutants, which show reduced fitness in the presence of competing organisms. Inhibitory effect of wild-type P. protegens Pf-5 and its derivatives on the growth of B. subtilis strain 168 on NYA at 4 dpi. The pltR* mutant is an overproducer of pyoluteorin (Table 2). The small zone of inhibition surrounding the ΔgacA mutant could be due to siderophore or bacterocin production, which do not require GacS-GacA (15, 16). Determining the nature of this inhibition was beyond the scope of this study. The experiment was repeated three times with similar results. One representative replicate of four replicates is shown. Download FIG S5, TIF file, 3.3 MB. We commonly observe colony variants that exhibit a Gac− phenotype (expanded colony size, flat, increased fluorescence under UV light, orange color following many days of incubation) (21, 24) in 3- to 5-day agar cultures of P. protegens Pf-5. These observations suggest that Pf-5 cultures typically consist of subpopulations of the wild type and Gac− mutants that vary in proportion under different conditions. Populations of Pseudomonas spp. in the rhizosphere also contain variants with gacS or gacA mutations (24, 47, 48). The Gac− mutant subpopulation may dominate in nutrient-rich conditions, such as NYB evaluated in this study, to achieve a maximum proliferation of the whole population. The wild-type subpopulation may dominate in other conditions, such as in the presence of competitors when GacS-GacA is needed to optimize fitness. Given the known role of GacS-GacA in controlling diverse cellular traits, including motility, biofilm formation, and secondary metabolism (15, 16, 20), spontaneous mutation of gacS or gacA provides a mechanism to regulate bacterial adaption at both cellular and population levels. In this study, medium composition (NYB versus NBG) and competition with B. subtilis influenced the predominance of Gac− mutants in culture in a manner that supports the role of secondary metabolism as a primary phenotype influencing bacterial fitness. We recognize, however, that the influence of the GacS-GacA system reaches beyond secondary metabolism, controlling the expression of approximately 10% of the genes in the genome of P. protegens Pf-5 (15). Accordingly, different GacS-GacA-regulated phenotypes are likely to influence the relative fitness of Gac− mutants versus wild type in different conditions. For example, the motility of strain Pf-5 is influenced by the GacS-GacA system (16), and the predominance of Gac− mutants at the advancing edge of swarming colonies of P. protegens Pf-5 has been attributed to their hyperflagellation (17). Biofilm formation is also influenced by the GacS-GacA system (16), and Driscoll et al. (23) reported evidence for a mutualism between Gac− mutant and wild-type cells of P. chlororaphis 30-84 in laboratory biofilms. Duffy and Défago (24) proposed that the osmotic potential of the medium influenced the proportion of Gac− mutants in cultures of P. protegens CHA0, recognizing that GacS-GacA influences the response of bacterial cells to environmental stress (20, 27). Secondary metabolism influenced the proportion of Gac− mutants in cultures of P. protegens Pf-5 in this study, but other GacS-GacA-controlled phenotypes are likely to mediate the proportion of Gac− mutant versus wild-type cells in other Pseudomonas species and in other environments. P. protegens, P. chlororaphis, and other species in the Pseudomonas fluorescens group have characteristics, including their capacities to colonize plant surfaces and produce antifungal secondary metabolites, that make them well suited as biological control agents for the management of plant diseases (49–52). Bacteria in the P. fluorescens group are known to contribute to the disease suppressive characteristics of certain agricultural soils, and some strains have been developed as commercial products that can be applied to plant surfaces to suppress plant disease (53). The genetic instability of these bacteria is a concern in the development of biological control for use in agriculture: if Gac− mutants predominate in cultures used to produce inoculum, biocontrol efficacy could be lost because secondary metabolites essential for their biological control activity are not produced (20, 21, 24). The results of this study substantiate previous conclusions that the emergence and accumulation of Gac− mutants are context dependent (17, 24). Accordingly, media for inoculum development can be selected to minimize the possibility that Gac− mutants will develop. Secondary metabolite production is an adaptive characteristic subject to natural selection. It contributes to ecologic fitness of the producers (1, 2) but can be metabolically costly (7). Secondary metabolism in Pseudomonas spp. is controlled by intricate regulatory circuits that include pathway-specific and global regulators that respond to environmental cues and physiological status. For example, in addition to the positive regulation imposed by GacS-GacA (54) and the pathway-specific regulator PltR (30), synthesis of pyoluteorin is also kept in check by numerous negative regulators that operate at the transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels. Specifically, pyoluteorin production by P. protegens Pf-5 and other strains of Pseudomonas is moderated by the presence of nonpreferred codons in PltR (11), transcriptional repressor PltZ (55), RNA-binding protein RsmE (45), stationary-phase sigma factor RpoS (29), Lon protease (56), and phloroglucinol, an intermediate in the biosynthesis of 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (36, 46). The presence of multiple layers of negative regulation suggests that controlling pyoluteorin production to moderate levels is important for the fitness of the bacterial cell. When conditions allow relatively high levels of pyoluteorin production, such as the NYB cultures evaluated in this study, Gac− mutants accumulate, thereby stopping secondary metabolism. Overall, our data showed that P. protegens Pf-5 accumulates spontaneous Gac− mutants in a nutrient-rich medium conducive to the synthesis of pyoluteorin and other secondary metabolites. We showed that secondary metabolism, specifically pyoluteorin synthesis, has an important role in the accumulation of Gac− mutants. Furthermore, interspecific competition with B. subtilis, which requires a functional GacS-GacA system and its controlled secondary metabolism (pyoluteorin synthesis), influences the accumulation of Gac− mutants. We propose that both the metabolic load and the fitness advantage associated with secondary metabolism are important factors contributing to the accumulation of Gac− mutants. The results of this study support the contention that the accumulation of Gac− mutants is an approach by which bacteria shut off secondary metabolism under conditions in which cells pay more in metabolic cost than gained in ecologic fitness to the population.