DISCUSSION The 7.8-MB genome of strain ATCC 31433 was sequenced and found to comprise three chromosomal replicons and one plasmid. MLST analysis revealed that strain ATCC 31433, rather than being a pseudomonad, is a member of the Burkholderia cepacia complex and is closely related to B. ubonensis, although it may still be a distinct species. Further analysis of the bioactivity, taxonomy, and genomics of strain ATCC 31433 is warranted under its reclassification as a member of the B. cepacia complex. Strain ATCC 31433 harbors many genes associated with environmental resilience and antibiotic resistance, including a wide range of efflux pumps. Antibiotic and metal susceptibility testing confirmed the resistant phenotype. Only 2 of the 24 antibiotics tested (piperacillin and ceftazidime) showed clear activity against strain ATCC 31433, and similar resistance to transition metal ions was observed. While many of the predicted heavy metal resistance genes encode efflux pumps, other detoxification systems were also seen. Several environmental Burkholderia strains have been described as metal resistant, although most of those strains are actually less tolerant of metal ions than P. mesoacidophila (40–43). The antibiotic resistance found in strain ATCC 31433 is similar to that seen in Burkholderia species. Indeed, several Burkholderia species with high-level β-lactam resistance have been identified (9, 44). Pseudomonads are generally susceptible to monobactams, carbapenems, cefepime, aminoglycosides, and polymyxin B, whereas strain ATCC 31433 is resistant to all of these compounds, including the antipseudomonal aminoglycoside tobramycin. Resistance to monobactams may also be explained by the production of isosulfazecin by strain ATCC 31433 (1). The biosynthetic gene cluster for this metabolite, like that for sulfazecin in P. acidophila (19), contains efflux pumps and a β-lactamase as self-resistance mechanisms. Despite the potential pathogenicity suggested by the genome sequence, to our knowledge there are no reported cases of strain ATCC 31433 causing disease; however, opportunistic pathogenicity toward vulnerable hosts remains an inherent trait of the B. cepacia complex (9). Conversely, the large number of biosynthetic gene clusters identified in the genome of strain ATCC 31433 suggests that it may be a rich source of specialized metabolites, compared to related Burkholderia species, and B. ubonensis has been shown to have activity against the pathogen B. pseudomallei (45). AntiSMASH (16) analysis of the strain ATCC 31433 genome identified known gene clusters for malleilactone, ornibactin, isosulfazecin, alkylhydroxyquinoline, and pyrrolnitrin biosynthesis, while revealing additional biosynthetic potential from uncharacterized biosynthetic gene clusters for polyketides, nonribosomal peptides, and other metabolites. Genes encoding bacteriocins, which are thought to represent the active principle in B. ubonensis activity against B. pseudomallei (45), were found. The biosynthesis of bulgecin is of particular interest. The biosynthetic route to the bulgecinine (4-hydroxy-5-hydroxymethylproline) core of bulgecin (12, 46) is not known but may involve direct elaboration of proline or the action of a transketolase on hydroxypyruvate and aspartate semialdehyde, prior to transfer to NRPS, glycosyltransferase, and sulfotransferase components for formation of bulgecin A itself. Several candidate genes have been identified for further investigation. In summary, the genome sequence of strain ATCC 31433 is consistent with that of an environmental Burkholderia isolate from the B. cepacia complex. The full biosynthetic potential of this strain, including determination of the location of the gene cluster responsible for biosynthesis of the bulgecins and identification of the products of the uncharacterized gene clusters, as well as precise classification of the strain, merits further investigation. Bulgecin may prove to be a valuable tool for studying and overcoming antibiotic resistance.