Discussion Gram-negative bacteria can be sensitized to different antibiotics by sub-inhibitory concentrations of polymyxin or colistin.30 We could find only a few reports addressing the ability of polymyxin-based combinations to kill the target pathogens: these studies were performed at 1 mg/L polymyxin and at a single, high concentration (20 mg/L) of vancomycin,21 teicoplanin31 or telavancin.22 In this study, we show that, in addition its strong synergism, essentially the same combinations of NAI-107 and polymyxin that inhibit growth also reduce viable counts below the detection limit of the Gram-negative pathogens. Few studies have investigated antibacterial activity against non-dividing S. aureus cells. Mascio et al.27 demonstrated that daptomycin kills MRSA in stationary phase, with a mechanism that does not require energy or protein synthesis. In their elegant studies, Müller et al.32 demonstrated that daptomycin binds to high-fluidity regions in the membrane, thus preventing the function of proteins that specifically localize to those regions. Combining the two observations, we surmise that high-fluidity regions are present in non-dividing cells. Unlike vancomycin, oritavancin kills non-dividing S. aureus cells, and septum staining of stationary phase cells is affected by oritavancin and not by vancomycin.26 NAI-107 forms 1:1 or 2:1 complexes with bactoprenol–pyrophosphate-coupled precursors of the bacterial cell wall, such as lipid II. In whole cells, NAI-107 does not form nisin-like pores in the bacterial membrane, but binding of NAI-107 to lipid II is followed by a slow membrane depolarization.11 Current evidence indicates that NAI-107, like nisin, binds to the pyrophosphate moiety of lipid II,11 a site distinct from the binding site of glycopeptides. Indeed, vancomycin does not kill non-dividing S. aureus,26 as confirmed here, consistent with the fact that the d-Ala-d-Ala moiety (i.e. vancomycin’s target) is not present in mature peptidoglycan.33 Altogether, the observed killing by NAI-107 of MRSA and GISA cells under non-dividing conditions is consistent with the hypothesis that killing requires interaction with the membrane. In the case of NAI-107, we believe this interaction occurs after an initial docking on lipid II or other bactoprenol–pyrophosphate-based intermediates. Indeed, it has been recently reported that peptidoglycan recycling is important for survival in the stationary phase of Gram-positive bacteria, including S. aureus.34 Although not demonstrated by these authors, such recycling might involve pyrophosphate-based carriers similar to lipid II, and would explain NAI-107's activity against non-dividing cells. A similar explanation might apply also to the reported killing of non-dividing cells by oritavancin.26 We were surprised to observe that NAI-107 can also kill non-dividing cells of two A. baumannii strains at sub-MIC values. This phenomenon might be a general feature of this species, as it was not observed with E. coli, K. pneumoniae and P. aeruginosa. Thus, it is tempting to speculate that the permeability of the A. baumannii outer membrane might change as the cells go from a non-dividing to a dividing state, allowing NAI-107 to reach its target under the former conditions. Among the four pathogenic species in Table 3, A. baumannii is the only species for which NAI-107 showed occasionally a measured MIC. In this respect, it has been reported that A. baumannii is generally more permeable to large antibiotics such as novobiocin and erythromycin, possibly connected with the ability of Acinetobacter spp. to use long-chain fatty acids as growth substrates.35 A growing body of evidence indicates the importance of killing persisters and non-dividing cells in an infection setting.36 Overall, the results of the current work, along with previously published results on the efficacy of NAI-107 in experimental models of infection,12,13 indicate that this lantibiotic represents a promising option in addressing the serious threat of antibiotic resistance in Gram-positive pathogens, with rapid killing of actively dividing and non-dividing MRSA and GISA cells. In addition, the activity of NAI-107 against N. gonorrhoeae, its ability to kill non-dividing A. baumannii and its strong synergism with polymyxin might provide additional therapeutic options for treating infections by A. baumannii, E. coli, K. pneumoniae and P. aeruginosa. From the limited comparisons reported here, it appears that NAI-108 shares the same properties as NAI-107.