DISCUSSION Although the presence of promoter elements within the cluster cannot be excluded, the results presented in this paper suggest that all of the genes in the tunicamycin biosynthetic gene cluster are cotranscribed in S. chartreusis from two promoters, one of which, tunp2, is not utilized in S. coelicolor. The latter presumably reflects elements of regulation that are missing in the heterologous host or the absence of cis-acting regulatory sequences upstream of tunp2 in the cloned SacI fragment that are required for its activation. With the exception of the 5′ tunA, all of the genes required for wild-type levels of tunicamycin biosynthesis appear to be translationally coupled to the preceding gene. It is conceivable that such an arrangement ensures near stoichiometric production of each of the corresponding proteins, which, interestingly, would be consistent with the production of a large multifunctional enzyme complex. Given that tunIJ also exhibit this coupling, it is also conceivable that such a complex could be located at the cell membrane. Its existence would also be consistent with the inability to detect biosynthetic intermediates predicted to accumulate in the tunCDEH mutants either by mass spectrometry analysis or by cross-feeding, i.e., the lack of any one component could result in inactivation of the entire complex (or indeed of a subcomplex). Repeated attempts to complement the tunA mutant using both the ermE* and native tunA promoter (data not shown) failed. Similar observations were made for mibA, the 5′ gene in a polycistronic mRNA that is essential for microbisporicin biosynthesis in Microbispora corallina (Lucy Foulston, personal communication). It is conceivable that this reflects an essential element of posttranscriptional control that operates on the 5′ end of the tun operon transcript that is absent in the tunA deletion mutant. The deletion analysis reported here and previously (8) has demonstrated that of the 14 genes contained within the tun gene cluster just six (tunABCDEH) are essential for tunicamycin production in S. coelicolor, each of which can be assigned a likely biosynthetic role Fig. 7) (7, 8), while tunI and tunJ are required for immunity. Of the others, tunFGKLN all have putative roles also carried out by homologues involved in primary metabolism, potentially explaining their nonessentiality. This would require that the primary metabolic enzymes were capable of substituting for their Tun counterparts if the latter were indeed present in the hypothetical tunicamycin biosynthetic complex (see above); alternatively, the complex might only contain the essential enzymes, TunABCDEH. The presence of tunFGKLN within the tun gene cluster may be to ensure adequate precursor supply and/or flux at the onset of tunicamycin production, feeding the likely critical C-C bond-forming step (tunFGN) and efficient acylation from the endogenous fatty acid pool during biosynthesis (tunKL) (see Fig. 7 and references 7, 8 for a detailed discussion of tunicamycin biosynthesis). Indeed, deletion of tunF, tunG, or tunK resulted in a reproducible reduction in antibiotic activity (Fig. 4). The ability of the tunL mutant clone to produce tunicamycin in S. coelicolor M1152 contrasts with the results reported by Chen et al. (12), where tunicamycin production was abolished when a tunL-deleted gene cluster was introduced into Streptomyces lividans TK24. However, since TunL is a putative phospholipid phosphatase with homologues encoded by the S. coelicolor genome (e.g., SCO1102 and SCO0402) that are likely involved in primary metabolism, it is conceivable that this disparity reflects differences in the heterologous hosts and growth conditions used in the two studies. Given the very low level of tunicamycin production in the tunF mutant, it is also possible that a homologous host epimerase (e.g., SCO3137 and/or SCO2988) is responsible for partial suppression of tunF oblation. The deletion analysis reported here rules out the previously assigned role for TunM in tunicamycin biosynthesis (8). However, the ability of tunM to confer resistance to tunicamycin in S. coelicolor, and the increased levels of tunicamycin susceptibility observed after deletion of tunM from the tun gene cluster in S. coelicolor, suggest that it may instead play a role in immunity in the producing organism. Intriguingly, TunM encodes a putative SAM-dependent methyltransferase and, although unprecedented to our knowledge, it is conceivable that it mediates its effect by modification of intracellular tunicamycin to provide an immunity mechanism, although such a nonreversible modification would require a corresponding demethylation for activation, perhaps after export. Conceivably, such demethylation enzymes might exist in the natural host's key target organisms. Alternatively, self-resistance might be mediated by methylation of endogenous enzyme (or other molecular) targets of the antibiotic (or indeed by modification of one of their substrates in a manner that would afford sufficient substrate protection to prevent tunicamycin from binding to any corresponding complex). FIG 7Proposed pathway for tunicamycin biosynthesis. tun gene products essential for tunicamycin production are circled in red and nonessential proteins in green. Proposed pathway for tunicamycin biosynthesis. tun gene products essential for tunicamycin production are circled in red and nonessential proteins in green.