Discussion The ability of cytorhodin producers to develop self-defense mechanisms to protect them from the effects of self-made cytotoxins such as glycosides 6 and 7 is clear. Under anaerobic conditions, the CytA-catalyzed reaction with NADH first provides a hydroquinone species which then undergoes C-7 deglycosylation to generate a quinone methide; the quinone methide is then envisioned to quickly rearrange to reduction product 7-deoxyanthracycline (Fig. 2c), in a fashion similar to that observed with previously reported transformation reactions11,24. In the presence of O2, the initially added electron is transferred from the reduced anthracycline to O2 to return the starting quinone; elimination chemistry at the C-7 center is averted (Fig. 2c). Microbial transformations and/or exogenous redox enzymes identified in previous studies revealed that several anthracycline antibiotics can be converted to their non-toxic 7-deoxyanthracycline congeners (Supplementary Fig. 4). In this study, we discovered an uncharacterized enzyme that drives the deoxy reduction process. Inactivation of cytA in Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1666 impaired the production of C-7 reduced products. Additionally, in vitro studies with purified CtyA revealed its ability to cleave cosmomycins C and D and a set of clinically used drugs with C-7 sugar moieties. Therefore, we conclude that CytA is responsible for degrading cosmomycins C and D to their less active products cosmomycins A and B in the cytorhodin biosynthetic pathway (Fig. 4). The CytA-catalyzed reaction involves anaerobic one electron reduction of the anthracycline quinone ring, using NADH as a cofactor; the absence of O2 and longevity of the reduced species enables loss of the trisaccharide sugar moiety. This elimination produces a quinone methide intermediate and subsequent tautomerization by C-7 protonation leads to the formation of the 7-deoxyaglycone. This mechanism of anthracycline detoxification appears to complement previously reported soil-bourne bacterial detoxification systems that rely on respiratory electron transport complex I-like multi-enzyme complexes11. We also demonstrated that this enzyme-catalyzed deglycosylation constitutes a mechanism of self-resistance for the antibiotic-producing microbes; that this chemistry has the potential to alter clinically relevant agents was also shown. Hence, to our knowledge, this is the first report of a single enzyme endogenous to the producer that mediates reductive cleavage of anthracycline antibiotics; these studies suggest that CytA plays a key role in both microbial and mammalian mechanisms of anthracycline resistance. Further compounding the importance of these findings is that the CytA homologs AclJ, NivJ, and CinSSBG_00486 are all members of the nitroreductase family which carry out similar chemistries. These enzymes are widespread in Actinobacteria and Mycobacterium tuberculosis but are not yet characterized. Thus, beyond its clear relevance to understanding mechanisms of anthracycline resistance, CytA likely provides us a previously unreported tool by which to further our understanding of nitroreductases that have a clear bearing on human medicine.Fig. 4Proposed cytorhodin biosynthetic pathway. Fig. 4Proposed cytorhodin biosynthetic pathway. Proposed cytorhodin biosynthetic pathway.