Discussion Exploration of uncommon microbiota sources appears to be a promising approach to search for and select both antibiotics and probiotics from wild nature. Classical microbiology, however, is inefficient for deep functional profiling of entire microbiomes. Here we show how microfluidic uHT screening technologies could be applied for classical microbiological problems, i.e., antibiotic/probiotic selection and susceptibility/resistance testing. The technological advantage of MDE encapsulation provides an opportunity of a single-cell manipulation and detailed ultrahigh-throughput functional characterization of microbial communities. Our technique enabled an efficient and straightforward single-step isolation of bacteria displaying the desirable anti-S. aureus activity from an exotic microbiota source. Subsequent metabolomic analysis, sequencing, and genome mining revealed the main active compound (Ami) and its biosynthetic cluster in the genome of a promising probiotic candidate B. pumilus. When we were analyzing the metagenomes of the bacteria selected after uHT screening, we observed the amplification of numerous bacteria that were unculturable under the specific conditions of the experiment. Although B. pumilus was selected by uHT screening as a culturable component of bear microbiome, we believe that this principle is particularly interesting as a source of data for deep metagenome mining and selection of unexplored biosynthetic clusters as well as for uHT analysis of unculturable species. The selected Ami cluster from B. pumilus was characterized using proteomics and heterologous expression, which revealed a specific mechanism of Ami inactivation/activation via kinase AmiN and phosphatase AmiO activity. We found that the Ami cluster is present only in a few B. pumilus reference genomes; the presence of amiN, however, is almost ubiquitous (SI Appendix, Fig. S9A). B. pumilus have amiN and the Ami cluster in the same neighborhood (Fig. 2A), while strains without the Ami cluster have a stand-alone amiN homolog (SI Appendix, Fig. S9B). We hypothesize that stand-alone AmiN-like kinases have a promiscuous specificity toward Ami analogs (or related antibiotics like zwittermycin, Fig. 3), while the bona fide AmiN is a dedicated enzyme that evolved for efficient inactivation of and self-resistance to Ami. AmiN homologs are found in numerous Bacillus species that stress their functional significance (SI Appendix, Fig. S10). Moreover, we found it in thermoactinomycete Paludifilum halophilum that also contains a homologous Ami cluster (Fig. 3). To probe the effectiveness of a particular external influence on the entire microbial community, we developed the uHT technique based on a single-cell in droplet cultivation. The only limitations of this method lie in in droplet cultivability and accuracy of bioinformatic analysis. We observed, however, that the overwhelming majority of bacterial species in our samples were culturable in droplets and lending themselves well to the freely available algorithms such as MetaPhlAn2. The spectrum of Ami activity was analyzed using different microbiomes and quantitative estimations of Ami activity on bacteria were made. We found Ami to be especially active against Gram-positive bacteria. Furthermore, it is active against some bacteria relevant to dysbiosis, and we suppose that Ami-producing strains could be used for controlled microbiota remodeling. Further investigations of this approach, however, must be done in terms of its safety and efficiency in vivo. Finally, we assume that the demonstrated approach is not limited to bacterial communities and could be efficiently expanded to the deep functional profiling of eukaryotic cells in applications such as biomarker probing and chemotherapy resistance/efficiency screening.