Discussion We uncovered several strong associations between transporters within characterized BGCs and features of the corresponding BGC-synthesized metabolites. With regard to prediction of metabolite activity, we quantified the specificity of TonB-dependent receptors, FecCD, and Periplasmic binding protein 2 for siderophore-producing BGCs. This complements existing literature indicating that genes in these families are specific for siderophore import in both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria (Chu et al. 2010). We also identified a putative association between the MacB tripartite efflux pump and antibacterial/antifungal activity. Based on these findings, a strategy of targeting novel BGCs containing MacB for characterization may be useful for antibiotic prospecting. In addition to activity prediction, we used metabolite structural information in MIBiG to predict metabolite molecular weight and lipophilicity from BGC gene content. We discovered a strong relationship between the transporters in characterized BGCs and the molecular weight of their synthesized metabolites. The strong dichotomy between ATP-dependent transporters (using the ABC_tran nucleotide binding domain) and MFS family transporters points toward required ATP-dependence for transporting metabolites >1000 Da. We also identified relationships between two understudied membrane components (ABC2_membrane_3 and ABC2_membrane_4) and substrate log P, possibly indicating trade-off in membrane domains for molecules of different chemical properties. Future phylogeny-based subdivision of these families may improve on general protein family annotations to increase the predictive power of transporter substrate characteristics. There are multiple caveats to our work. Molecular activity of specialized metabolites based on functions proven in the laboratory may be very different from the ecological roles that metabolites play in natural settings (Behnsen and Raffatellu 2016; van der Meij et al. 2017; Kramer et al. 2020). Further, many BGCs may produce multiple variants of a metabolite (Fischbach and Clardy 2007), only some of which may be reported. There may also be reference-database biases in our gene searches—although they are sensitive, it is possible that phylogenetically divergent microbes use transporter genes that are not hit by our sequence models. Finally, as reported, a significant proportion of BGCs contain no transporter at all or a transporter gene genomically adjacent to a BGC may not be functionally linked. There are both technical and biological reasons why a BGC might not contain a transporter gene. First, the transporter(s) for the metabolite produced may be encoded elsewhere in the genome. Second, the BGC's genomic boundaries may be misannotated, and the transporter may be downstream from annotated genes. Third, it is possible that the metabolite being produced performs its primary function intracellularly and does not require a transporter for export. It is also possible that there are unannotated transport systems in BGCs: To further investigate this, we identified unannotated proteins with transmembrane domains in BGCs and found that 18% of BGCs in MIBiG without a transporter contained one unknown membrane protein. Despite these caveats, it appears as though transporter genes provide simple and strong signals for inferring both activity and chemical properties of metabolites produced by BGCs. Siderophores are both considered critical pathogenicity factors for many human-associated microbes (Weakland et al. 2020) and are also known to facilitate interactions with other microbes and the innate immune system in the human gut microbiome (Behnsen and Raffatellu 2016; Holden et al. 2016; Lam et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2020). Therefore, being able to annotate genes for the production of siderophores across diverse bacterial species may be critical for understanding the distribution of virulence factors, yet it is difficult to do using traditional annotation pipelines alone. We observed a high prevalence of siderophore-like BGCs in bacterial genomes from NICU premature infant guts, suggesting that the premature infant gut could be more prone to invasion by pathogens with siderophore virulence factors. Potentially novel siderophore-like BGCs were most consistently found to be encoded in the genomes of members of the Enterobacteriaceae and Staphylococcus in the premature infant microbiome. Only in the adult microbiome data sets did we identify siderophore-like BGCs in the Lachnospiraceae, that are often considered important commensals, indicating that there may also be commensal siderophore production in adult gut microbiomes. Importantly, we identified siderophore-like BGCs in these taxa that are not homologous to known siderophore clusters, indicating that there is still substantial unknown chemical diversity of siderophores, even within well-studied lineages. In general, here we showed that consideration of transporter genes can aid holistic functional prediction of BGC products. A transporter-guided approach could be especially useful for identification of siderophore targets for medical (Nagoba and Vedpathak 2011) and biotechnological applications (Ahmed and Holmström 2014). Given the large diversity of BGCs and that chemical characterization of their products can be time and resource intensive, better functional prediction of BGCs for targeted study can improve selection of targets for antimicrobial discovery and downstream activity tests.