3. Discussion The genes responsible for CTV biosynthesis were previously identified in A. terreus ver. aureus [16], while those of P. citreonigrum, which is an important species that causes most of the world’s CTV contamination of rice, are veiled. Thus, in the present study, we aimed to identify the genes for CTV biosynthesis in the P. citreonigrum genome. Biosynthesis of fungal secondary metabolites, including mycotoxins, are generally produced through numerous enzymatic steps [19,20]. The genes that encode the enzymes to produce the secondary metabolites are generally located near each other and form a biosynthetic gene cluster on the chromosome. For example, biosynthesis of aflatoxin, which is the most studied and well-known mycotoxin as a highly toxic and carcinogenic secondary metabolite, requires 28 genes to be produced, and these genes are clustered on chromosome 3 in A. flavus [21,22,23]. The genes for CTV biosynthesis in A. terreus also form a cluster (Figure 1a) [16]. In the present study, we determined the draft genome of P. citreonigrum strain IMI92228 and searched for genes that are homologous to the biosynthesis genes of CTV in A. terreus. Next-generation sequencing of the P. citreonigrum strain IMI92228 yielded a total of 7611 Mbp, and the final assembly was found to contain 27 Mbp in 79 scaffolds. The total length of scaffolds and estimated genome size were relatively small compared to previously reported genomes of the Penicillium species [24,25,26,27], although these scaffolds code 97.3% of single copy genes that were conserved in Eurotiomycetes, which is enough to search for the homologous gene cluster that corresponds to the CTV biosynthetic cluster of A. terreus. The estimated genome size may be underestimated because only short inset sizes were estimated, and short read analysis may be insufficient to evaluate repeat regions and transposable elements of the genome. Further analysis on the genome structure of P. citreonigrum strain IMI92228 will provide more accurate information on genome size. Furthermore, we found genes that show high homology to all four CTV biosynthesis genes in A. terreus-ctvA to ctvD, and which are sufficient for CTV formation (Table 2). We named these genes ci-ctvA to ci-ctvD. These four predicted genes were located near each other on scaffold 16 and form a gene cluster, such as that in the A. terreus genome (Figure 1). Interestingly, the direction and order were also similar to those in the A. terreus genome except for the presence of an extra gene, g1457, between ci-ctvC and ci-ctvD, and which is not found in the A. terreus genome. Generally, in the biosynthetic gene clusters for the same secondary metabolite, the order of the homologous genes differs among species, which suggests that the precise gene order is not crucial for function. For example, the gene order markedly differs between the aflatoxin biosynthetic gene cluster in A. flavus and the sterigmatocystin cluster in A. nidulans, although A. flavus also produces sterigmatocystin as an intermediate of aflatoxin [28,29]. The gene order of the CTV biosynthesis gene cluster was tremendously similar when comparing A. terreus and P. citreonigrum (Figure 1), suggesting that the origin of them may be same. This is evolutionally interesting and the function of the genes may be conserved. On the other hand, the gene that shows high homology to ctvE was located on scaffold 19, which is different from the scaffold that ci-ctvA to ci-ctvD were located on (Figure 1, g2666). Scaffold 16 and 19 can be combined if more precise genome sequencing emerges. However, these genes that are found in the middle of each scaffold imply that ci-ctvA to ci-ctvD and g2666 do not form a gene cluster in P. citreonigrum. ctvE is thought to be a F1-ATPase β-subunit, which is a known target of citreoviridin [16]. Lin et al. [16] demonstrated that A. terreus has an extra copy of the F1-ATPase β-subunit, known as ctvE, near the CTV biosynthesis cluster, and they predicted that this copy ensures self-resistance against CTV. The genome analysis of the P. citreonigrum strain IMI9228 that was performed in this study revealed that there was only one F1-ATPase β-subunit gene (g2666), which is more similar to ATEG_07609, also known as the F1-ATPase β-subunit, rather than ctvE. This indicates that the F1-ATPase β-subunit does not duplicate in the P. citreonigrum genome. Therefore, P. citreonigrum should protect itself from CTV by a different method than by harboring an extra F1-ATPase β-subunit gene. The genome analysis that was performed in this study predicted a gene that was not found in the A. terreus genome, specifically between ci-ctvC and ci-ctvD. This gene is similar to the HC-toxin efflux carrier TOXA and has an MFS_Azr1_MDR_like domain, which is shared among multidrug resistance transporters of the major facilitator superfamily [30]. Efflux-mediated toxin resistance to trichothecenes is well-regarded in certain trichothecene-producing Fusarium species [31,32]. P. citreonigrum may achieve self-resistance against CTV by possessing an MFS transporter in the biosynthesis cluster of CTV. These results strongly suggest that ci-ctvA to ci-ctvD are involved in the CTV biosynthesis in P. citreonigrum. To validate the responsibility of the genes for CTV biosynthesis in P. citreonigrum, expression analysis was performed (Figure 3). The expression level of ci-ctvA was highest at day 4, that is immediately before CTV production peak and then gradually decreased on YES agar (Figure 2 and Figure 3a). Since ci-ctvA is believed to be a HR-PKS gene, in which the encoding enzyme accepts acetyl-CoA as the starter unit for CTV and catalyzes iterations of both the malonyl-CoA extension and SAM-dependent methylation at the beginning of CTV biosynthesis [16], the expression profile is correlated with CTV production. On the other hand, the expressions of ci-ctvB, ci-ctvC and ci-ctvD peaked on day 7, which is correlated with CTV production. These three genes operate in the steps of CTV biosynthesis after the ci-ctvA step, and their expression profiles correlate with CTV production. Moreover, expressions of all four genes decreased on YES agar with 5% NaCl, whereby CTV production was suppressed. These results ascertain the potential of ci-ctvA to ci-ctvD as key genes for CTV biosynthesis in P. citreonigrum, although further analysis, such as deficient mutant analyses, must be conducted to confirm responsibility for CTV production.