Discussion The evolution of a specialized metabolite biosynthetic pathway involves the emergence of enzymes that catalyze committed steps toward synthesizing core metabolites. These core metabolites are then subsequently catalyzed by native coopting enzymes, resulting in the colossal chemodiversity of the plant metabolome51,52. The expanded chemodiversity, upon serving as a positive selection force, activates the evolutionary machinery, including the emergence of novel specialized enzymes through gene expansion/neofunctionalization, thus beginning the process of refining the imperfect secondary metabolite biosynthesis pathways53. Among Gentianales, the emergence of STR for the synthesis of strictosidine was an important innovation to promote the evolution of MIA biosynthesis, which occurred after the whole-genome triplication of core eudicot genomes (Fig. 6e and Supplementary Fig. 41). While STR-like enzyme homologs were identified and assigned across plant species from different lineages (Supplementary Fig. 29a), functional STRs (OG0015245) were specifically identified in the strictosidine-derived-MIA-producing plants (Fig. 6a and Supplementary Fig. 29b). C. roseus and G. sempervirens genome, which diverged ~68 Mya from Ophiorrhiza, consisted of a single copy of the STR gene, while the Ophiorrhiza genome contained two STR orthogenes, resulting from tandem duplication. One of the exceptions to the otherwise highly restricted MIA biosynthesis in Gentianales is camptothecin, which was first identified in C. acuminata of Cornales. Similar to the other plant genomes analyzed in this study, C. acuminata lost the functional STR enzyme and did not synthesize strictosidine. Instead, C. acuminata synthesizes strictosidinic acid for the biosynthesis of MIAs, including camptothecin42. For C. acuminata, the emergence of a bifunctional SLS (OG0013616) was important for the biosynthesis of strictosidinic acid, which incidentally also showed the fastest rate of substitution among all MIA-producing plants (Fig. 6e and Supplementary Fig. 41)43. With the WGD peak for C. acuminata detected at peak Ks of 0.469 and median Ks of 0.75 for SLS (OG0013616), our results suggest an earlier emergence of key metabolite intermediates prior to the WGD in C. acuminata, which then served as a catalyst that allowed post-WGD expansion and evolution of MIA biosynthesis (Supplementary Fig. 41). Synteny analysis between the coffee and Ophiorrhiza genomes showed significant genome collinearity, yet one of the key enzymes lost in the coffee genome included functional STR orthogene families. The coffee and Ophiorrhiza genomes diverged at ~47 Mya, suggesting that while the STR enzyme evolved through SSDs in Ophiorrhiza, the coffee genome instead lost the enzyme required for strictosidine synthesis. Comprehensive metabolite profiling of several species from the Coffea genus, including wild coffee species, could not detect strictosidine, suggesting the possibility that STR has been lost across different species from the Coffea genus54. Our study proposes that the retention of STR after the whole-genome triplication event in core eudicots was the critical event that allowed selected plant species to evolve MIAs and expand their chemodiversity (Fig. 6d–f and Supplementary Fig. 41). C. acuminata, the exception, instead uses a promiscuous enzyme for the synthesis of strictosidinic acid, which offered similar opportunities for the evolution of MIA biosynthesis. Despite their similar metabolite intermediates and chemotypes, the two parallel paths to the starting point of MIA biosynthesis in O. pumila and C. acuminata, an estimated speciation time of 120 Mya and their completely different genome dynamics leading to their present-day genomes lead us to propose the possibility of convergent evolution of camptothecin biosynthesis. As several functional metabolic gene clusters have been reported in the plant genome, identifying and analyzing gene clusters seems to be a promising means to identify candidate genes involved in the biosynthesis of specialized metabolites55. Since the number of functionally characterized metabolic gene clusters is still limited in plants, key features such as the extent of coexpression and the degree to which gene localization corresponds to participation within the same pathways are not yet clear. Wisecaver et al., noting that the physical proximity of genes associated with metabolic pathways is statistically significant in Arabidopsis, suggested gene coexpression as a key feature for identifying enzymes associated with known specialized metabolic pathways irrespective of the location of their genes in the genomes49. Several studies in the past have also reported the selective nature of coexpression of genes in a predicted metabolic gene cluster39,55–57. In the Ophiorrhiza genome, we also observed a lack of coexpression trends among member genes of a given gene cluster. The scattered nature of metabolic gene clusters seems to be prevalent across plant genomes, as observed in the case of MIA gene clusters, as well as previously reported secondary metabolic gene clusters in other plant species55,58. With the complexities associated with the regulation of gene-expression in plants, it is only rational to suggest that physical proximity may not be sufficient to facilitate coexpression among genes within a gene cluster57. On the other hand, gene clusters represent discrete genome segments that serve as the hotspots for retaining and evolving specialized metabolite biosynthesis. Benzylisoquinoline alkaloid biosynthesis is one of the best-known specialized metabolic pathways, with enzymes forming gene clusters within the opium poppy genome. Nevertheless, the nature of gene clustering was reported to be heterogeneous, with the thebaine and noscapine pathways being highly clustered, and the morphine and sanguinarine pathways being scattered56. These results suggest the possibility of the active evolution of genome architecture through a combination of natural and artificial selection for specialized metabolite biosynthesis centered at gene clusters. The gene clusters, therefore, could be regarded as blocks of secondary metabolite modules whose novel combinations could produce new chemotypes, which may offer unique phenotypes for positive selection. In the process of evolution, plants could lose some members of these modules or the entire module itself, and thus also lose the ability to further evolve or refine a particular phenotype. On the other hand, plant species that could retain the specific module could continue to iterate a particular phenotype to more perfectly adapt to the ecological challenges presented over time. As key mechanisms of evolution and speciation, genome restructuring and dynamics acting on gene clusters seems to provide an opportunity to evolve diverge chemotypes across plant species. In this study, we identified the C1541 gene cluster precisely playing this role in strictosidine-derived MIA-producing plants. This implies selection pressure favoring the clusters of genes involved in the biosynthesis of specialized metabolites and could be a way to identify genes involved in the biosynthesis of common metabolite classes going forward. One possible explanation for the positive selection of gene clusters is the reduced rate of recombination between genes involved in local adaptation55,59. Positive selection of gene clusters does have a possible role in providing chemotypes that may facilitate ecological/local success for a species or cultivar for successful propagation, as was reported for opium poppy56. The conserved nature and collinearity of metabolic gene clusters of the Ophiorrhiza genome across MIA-producing plant species suggest a potential means to select genes for functional studies. The role that gene clusters could play in the divergence of species is not clear, and more high-quality genomes of plants producing specialized metabolites are needed for comprehensive comparative genome analysis to further understand the evolutionary principles that allow a wide distribution of metabolic gene clusters across diverse plant species. The genome assembly strategy used in this study showed the importance of assembly validation at each step, which should be ignored. Previously, multistage scaffolding was reported as advantageous in assembling the goat genome20, and has also been used for other plant genomes19,21,60. However, our results showed that the order of scaffolding plays an important role in improved assembly contiguity. One possible explanation for the relevance of the order is the difference in genome resolution for each of the scaffolding technologies. The genome resolution ranges from 30–50 kb for PacBio reads, 150 kb–10 Mb for Bionano optical maps, ~2 Mb for 10× genomics, and 30–100 Mb for Hi-C61. Different plant genomes present different challenges, from polyploidy to genome size to repeat content. While we cannot claim that this order of scaffolding technologies will always offer as significant improvement as we observed for the Ophiorrhiza genome, our result certainly showed the importance of assembly validation at each stage of assembly. Stepwise scaffolding and error correction refine the assembly at each stage and therefore assist in achieving high assembly contiguity. While scaffold and contig N50 are widely accepted as genome assembly quality parameters, it is the number of assembly gaps that reflects the real sense of completeness and associated potential misassemblies. Furthermore, although we tested and validated the genome assembly at each stage using multiple orthogonal sequencing technologies, experimental analysis still detected an orientational error in the Ophiorrhiza genome, which suggests that relying solely on sequencing technologies is not sufficient in the pursuit of an accurate genome assembly. The next generation of plant genomes will need to go beyond the construction of mere scaffolds or pseudomolecules and should include experimental validation elements. With the emergence of high-fidelity long reads from PacBio, and longer and more accurate reads from Nanopore, assembly contiguity and contig N50 are expected to improve significantly, even for highly heterozygous plant species. Nevertheless, validation steps during and after scaffolding are essential for the accurate interpretation of evolutionary and paleogenomics analysis for all future studies. The status quo of the limited number of near-finished and experimentally validated reference plant genomes needs to change. We believe that this study represents the first step forward in that direction.