3. Discussion Since its discovery at the beginning of the 1980s [7,8,9], Ami raised only limited practical interest, predominantly in academia. Recently, the ribosome-targeting mechanism of Ami was elucidated both for pro- [11] and for eukaryotes [12]. Furthermore, the molecular mechanisms of Ami activation/attenuation [20] and self-resistance [5] were identified. Hence, we suggest that these recent advances provide new applications of Ami in the fields of synthetic biology, biotechnology, and biomedicine. The high-level production of Ami is of interest in these cases, and our results indicate how it could be achieved by the application of state-of-the-art microbiological technologies. Deep functional profiling facilitates the isolation of potent Ami producers, while proteomics and metabolomics provide an essential basis for boosting Ami production. Ami is active against both bacteria and mammalian cells, and this is the fundamental problem limiting its broad application. Taking into account the antibiotic potential of Ami, we classify it as a potent agent against Gram-positive pathogenic strains of Enterococcus and Staphylococcus, including MRSA. Ami was also reported as an efficient anti-H. pylori antibiotic, providing attractive gastroprotective action [13]. However, the major obstacle to the practical application of Ami is its low stability at physiological conditions. This is also relevant to H. pylori, which neutralizes the acidic conditions of the stomach via urease activity. Ami has a half-life of ~2 h in neutral and slightly alkaline conditions. That is more than 104 times lower than the respective values obtained for terminally amidated peptides [23]. Hence, the rate of Ami hydrolysis at physiological conditions is similar to that of spontaneous amide hydrolysis at 170 °С [24] and close to the hydrolysis rate achieved by artificial enzymes, i.e., proteolytic antibodies [23,25]. We suggest that the low stability of the terminal amide bond in Ami is an exclusive feature originating from its unique structure. The decomposition of Ami is a two-step process, including its self-lactonization, followed by lactone hydrolysis. The self-lactonization of Ami is the rate-limiting step that makes the main contribution to the acceleration of Ami hydrolysis. This is achieved by the formation of the lactone AmiC, simulating the transition state and reducing the energetic barrier of amide hydrolysis. We consider that the potential of Ami has been underestimated for a long time because of the decreased stability of Ami in biological fluids. While the instability of Ami is a stumbling block for its clinical application, we suggest this feature is not accidental. We speculate that Ami serves as an efficient biocontrol agent providing the benefit for Bacillus over its competitors in the wild. The instability of Ami is advantageous in this case, as it enables a precisely time-resolved control over its inhibitory activity. The total synthesis of natural products of the amicoumacin family was reported recently [26,27]. Hence, total organic synthesis could provide a vital source of new Ami analogs tailored for antimicrobial or anticancer drug discovery, reviving the interest in this antibiotic.