3. Discussion UniProt is engaged in a continuous effort to improve the integration, uniformization, sharing, and representation of protein knowledge. UniProtKB now uses the Rhea knowledgebase of biochemical transformations and transport reactions, based on the chemical ontology ChEBI, to link enzymes and transporters to explicit representations of the chemical structures of their substrates and products. Through Rhea and ChEBI, UniProtKB provides a platform to integrate knowledge of small molecule metabolites, including but not limited to natural products, with knowledge of protein sequences and their functions in a broad range of species. Expert-curated knowledge of protein function in UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot is complemented by additional knowledge and links from a wide network of collaborating resources covering many aspects of protein biology, including InterPro (protein domains and families) [34], PDBe (protein structures) [35], Reactome (pathways) [36], the IMEx databases of molecular interactions [37], the Gene Ontology Consortium (additional GO annotations) [38,39], PubMed literature (pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), and many more. Researchers in the field of natural products can leverage these additional annotations, links, and integrated datasets to study a broad array of aspects of protein biology. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes database (KEGG) provides a collection of manually drawn pathway maps including some secondary metabolism pathways (www.kegg.jp/kegg/pathway.html) [40,41,42]. Our work does not directly supply such maps but provides all the information to users to reconstruct similar pathway diagrams (see Figure 3 as an example) by using the 2D structures from ChEBI, the reactions provided by Rhea, and their corresponding enzymes as annotated in UniProtKB. The curation of natural product enzymes at UniProt is a new activity, begun after the introduction of Rhea as the standard for enzyme annotation in UniProtKB in late 2018 [23]. The focus of this annotation program—capturing the links between enzymes and natural products throughout pathways—complements the efforts of specialist resources such as The Natural Product Atlas [15] and COCONUT [16,17], which provide comprehensive libraries of all known natural products and of resources and tools that aim to provide comprehensive annotation of biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) and their ultimate products—such as antiSMASH [20], ClusterMine360 [19], and BiGFAM [43], which provide comprehensive annotation of biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) and their ultimate products. Current work at UniProt and Rhea focuses on improving the coverage and representation of natural products in ChEBI, reactions in Rhea, and enzymes in UniProtKB. UniProtKB currently provides enzyme annotations for over 1000 distinct natural products from ChEBI (see Section 2.1). While this is only a small fraction of the vast space of natural product structures that exist in specialist resources such as COCONUT and the Natural Product Atlas, knowledge of enzymatic pathways is not available for many if not most of the natural products found in these resources. Our own initial survey of literature cited in The Natural Products Atlas suggests that only around 10% of the literature cited deals with enzymes, while the majority describes the purification and characterization of the natural products themselves; we plan to further screen this subset of relevant literature in the Natural Product Atlas for enzyme annotations in UniProtKB. Another focus of our curation efforts is to improve the coverage of biosynthetic pathways in the Biological Process branch of the Gene Ontology. These biosynthetic pathway definitions provide a natural bridge between individual enzymes and biosynthetic gene clusters; the individual steps of pathways, captured in Rhea reactions, are also being mapped to the GO Molecular Function branch (Harold Drabkin, Peter d’Eustachio, Chris Mungall, and Paul Thomas, unpublished work). We also plan to expand the scope of Rhea to capture transformations—pairs of compounds that are known to be linked in or by reactions, but for which precise mechanistic detail on how the reaction occurs is not yet available (see goldbook.iupac.org/terms/view/T06446). Capturing transformations will further enhance our coverage of natural product biosynthetic pathways and other types too, including pathways for the modification of environmental pollutants [44,45].