DISCUSSION The work described herein has elucidated a clear biosynthetic role for two FAC-encoded enzymes, TzpA, an NRPS, and TzpB, an IDO, in the biosynthesis of terreazepine. A closer look at the genes surrounding tzpA and tzpB, however, reveals additional genes that could play a role in biosynthesis. Indeed, adjacent genes include an alcohol dehydrogenase (ATEG_07354), a transcription factor (ATEG_07357), and a P450 (ATEG_07362) (Fig. 2A; see Table S1 in the supplemental material). While we were unable to determine whether these additional genes encode regulatory elements or biosynthetic players involved in terreazepine formation, a few possibilities warrant discussion. First, it is possible that the tailoring enzymes present in the gene cluster (i.e., the P450 and the alcohol dehydrogenase) remain silent and that the gene cluster itself is only partially expressed. Given that only (S)-terreazepine is formed as an intermediate in nanangelenin A production in A. nanangensis (27), a second possibility is that these tailoring enzymes play a role in the epimerization of (S)-terreazpine to (R)-terreazepine. This epimerization could occur through a two-step mechanism similar to that of the conversion of (S)-reticuline to (R)-reticuline in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (33). Should this be the case, it would follow that TzpA produces (S)-terreazepine which is then oxidized from an amine to an enamine by the P450. This oxidized product could then be reduced by the alcohol dehydrogenase/oxidoreductase to form the S-R mixture that we observed. Of course, the activities of these enzymes are at this point only speculative, and future studies will be required to confirm what, if any, roles these enzymes play in terreazepine biosynthesis. The discovery of terreazepine provides another example of how fungi repurpose primary metabolism genes for secondary metabolism. On the basis of this and other examples, we propose two major strategies fungi employ for such repurposing: type I repurposing into biosynthetic enzymes and type II repurposing into resistance genes (Fig. 4). One of the earliest discoveries of type I repurposing is that of the important fungal toxin sterigmatocystin. Evaluation of the sterigmatocystin biosynthetic pathway revealed the presence of two fatty acid synthase (FAS) genes, stcJ and stcK located within the sterigmatocystin gene cluster. Indeed, disruption of these genes in A. nidulans resulted in strains that did not produce sterigmatocystin but were morphologically identical to wild-type strains (34). Another important example of type I repurposing is the duplicated isopropyl-malate synthase (IPMS) involved in echinocandin biosynthesis in Emericella rugulosa. Similar to the provision of kynurenine by TzpB, this duplicated IPMS serves to provide the nonproteinogenic amino acid homotyrosine for incorporation into echinocandin B (Fig. 4) (35). FIG 4Type I and type II primary metabolism gene repurposing strategies. Green arrows represent biosynthetic genes, including backbone genes, tailoring genes, and their regulatory elements. Gray arrows represent hypothetical proteins or genes unrelated to biosynthesis. Yellow arrows found in sterigmatocystin (stc) and echinocandin B (ecd and hty) biosynthetic gene clusters represent examples of type I repurposing of primary metabolism genes, and red arrows in fellutamide B (inp) and fumagillin (fma) gene clusters represent examples of type II repurposed primary metabolism genes. FAS, fatty acid synthase; IPMS, isopropylmalate synthase; P-β6, proteasome β6 subunit; M-AP, methionine aminopeptidase. Type I and type II primary metabolism gene repurposing strategies. Green arrows represent biosynthetic genes, including backbone genes, tailoring genes, and their regulatory elements. Gray arrows represent hypothetical proteins or genes unrelated to biosynthesis. Yellow arrows found in sterigmatocystin (stc) and echinocandin B (ecd and hty) biosynthetic gene clusters represent examples of type I repurposing of primary metabolism genes, and red arrows in fellutamide B (inp) and fumagillin (fma) gene clusters represent examples of type II repurposed primary metabolism genes. FAS, fatty acid synthase; IPMS, isopropylmalate synthase; P-β6, proteasome β6 subunit; M-AP, methionine aminopeptidase. In addition to repurposing duplicated primary metabolism genes to have a biosynthetic role, fungi also utilize duplicated genes from primary metabolism as a form of self-resistance (36, 37). This type II repurposing represents a particularly attractive avenue for drug discovery, as the duplicated gene will often provide insight into the mechanism of action of the encoded secondary metabolite. Several examples of such type II repurposing have been discovered by targeting clusters with duplicate resistance targets. The proteasome inhibitor fellutamide B, for example, was discovered due to the presence of a duplicated proteasome subunit within its BGC (38). Similarly, the BGC encoding the methionine aminopeptidase inhibitor fumagillin contains both type I and type II methionine aminopeptidase genes in the gene cluster (Fig. 4) (39). While it is likely that many of the IDOs contained within the BGCs depicted in Fig. 3 and Fig. S6 represent type I biosynthetic enzymes that provide kynurenine for secondary metabolite synthesis, it is also possible that they represent type II duplicated gene targets that serve to protect the producing organism against the biosynthetic product. Indeed, when we began this research, we suspected that terreazepine might possess IDO inhibitory activity and show promise as an anticancer agent (40). When tested against A. fumigatus IDO mutants, however, no growth inhibitory activity was observed (data not shown). Future studies aimed to elucidate the biosynthetic products of additional IDO-containing BGCs in fungi offer exciting opportunities not only to discover new molecular scaffolds but also to identify anticancer metabolites with known mechanisms of action. In sum, this work has shown the feasibility of using FACs to discover secondary metabolites from unusual BGCs. With this approach, we identified, reconstructed, cloned, and heterologously expressed an unusual BGC encoding the novel metabolite terreazepine. Thus far, IDO involvement in secondary metabolite biosynthesis in fungi has only just begun to be explored, suggesting that future efforts targeting BGCs including IDOs and other unusual biosynthetic players may prove fruitful. By mapping BGC relatedness across the fungal kingdom, we also uncover evidence of numerous IDO-containing BGCs in phylogenetically diverse fungi that may encode metabolites with novel chemical scaffolds or IDO inhibitory activity. This approach shows promise for focusing natural product discovery efforts toward uncharted biosynthetic space, yielding a diverse array of novel molecular scaffolds.