Discussion S. aureus is a major human pathogen that causes a spectrum of mild to severe diseases, including self-limiting skin infections to sepsis1. The emergence of MRSA has sparked interest in discovering new drugs to combat drug-resistant S. aureus infections. Attention has been focused on CoNS for drug discovery as these species compete against S. aureus in their respective ecological niches. Indeed, CoNS including S. epidermidis, S. hominis, S. lugdunensis, and S. capitis, have been reported to secrete effector molecules to inhibit S. aureus colonization and reduce its virulence9–11,35. These studies illustrate the importance of CoNS as a potential source of compounds that can be used to treat S. aureus infections. In this work, we found a strain of S. chromogenes that blocks purine biosynthesis to inhibit S. aureus growth. Importantly, de novo purine biosynthesis has recently been shown to regulate the virulence potential of S. aureus26,30,31. It is interesting that the tgs operon was found in S. chromogenes because this is a species that co-colonizes with S. aureus in cattle36–38. Since these two species occupy the same ecological niche, it is conceivable that they are in constant competition for space and nutrients. Indeed, it has been suggested that the presence of S. chromogenes offers protection against S. aureus infections in bovines36. The conservation of the tgs operon in S. chromogenes and other CoNS suggests that the genes have moved during competition in niches they co-occupy. For example, the CoNS that harbor the tgs operon colonize skin and mucosal surfaces of various mammals including humans, similar to S. aureus and are known to cause opportunistic infections24,39,40. The tgs-positive S. chromogenes and S. epidermidis strains that inhibit S. aureus growth produce at least tenfold more 6-TG into the culture supernatant than the two tgs-positive S. capitis strains. This difference would appear to account for the observed difference in the growth-inhibitory ability between the species, since the S. capitis tgs genes produce enough 6-TG to inhibit S. aureus growth when they are expressed from a multi-copy plasmid. Our ongoing studies seek to define the regulatory mechanism and signal(s) controlling expression of the operon in S. capitis. Here, we showed that NUDIX domain-containing proteins are responsible for 6-TG biosynthesis. NUDIX domain proteins are widespread among microbes and have been implicated in bacterial pathogenesis41. Therefore, it is likely that microbes besides Erwinia and staphylococcal species also synthesize 6-TG. At this time, the enzymatic reactions required to synthesize 6-TG are unknown without confirmation of biochemical activity of the Tgs enzymes. Our bioinformatic analyses (Table 1) allow us to speculate that GTP can serve as an initial substrate. A combination of TgsC, TgsE, and/or TgsF may cleave the phosphates off GTP to generate guanosine. TgsA is predicted to release a sulfur group from a donor molecule (e.g., cysteine), which then likely serves as a substrate for TgsB, which we predict transfers it guanine. TgsD is a predicted efflux membrane protein and presumably exports 6-TG out of the cell, and likely also therefore provides self-resistance to the molecule. Interestingly, our data demonstrate that, despite possessing the tgsD gene, growth of recombinant S. aureus carrying the tgs operon is still slowed in comparison to strains carrying vector alone (Supplementary Fig. 3). In this work, we show that bacteria expressing the tgs operon can reduce lesion formation in a subcutaneous S. aureus infection in a 6-TG-dependent manner during a co-infection. These data along with other studies demonstrate that CoNS on the skin can provide protection against infections caused by the more pathogenic S. aureus on the skin9,11,14. To demonstrate the therapeutic potential of 6-TG, we showed that the pure compound can be used to prophylactically treat S. aureus skin infections. Our data suggest that 6-TG acts therapeutically by reducing the overall amount of toxin that S. aureus may secrete during infection. We show that the molecular basis for the therapeutic effect of 6-TG is likely due to its ability to abrogate purine biosynthesis, which subsequently reduces ribosome synthesis and toxin production. Moreover, 6-TG downregulates transcription of the global virulence regulator agr, further reducing toxin production. By inhibiting de novo purine biosynthesis, we show that 6-TG can act as an anti-virulence compound in a subcutaneous S. aureus skin infection model as purine synthesis and toxin production are linked. These data reveal purine biosynthesis as an attractive drug target for treatment of MRSA infections, as targeting this pathway significantly affects toxin production, which is important for many types of S. aureus infections at different sites of the body42. Thus, it will be interesting to determine whether 6-TG can also be used to reduce disease severity and/or bacterial burden in other models of infection in future studies. Indeed, Lan et al. have shown that 6-TG can reduce S. aureus burden in a systemic infection in mice20. Moreover, it will be important to test other nucleobase analogs against S. aureus to potentially expand our repertoire of antimicrobials and/or anti-virulence compounds to treat MRSA infections. Like other thiopurines, 6-TG is a pro-drug that enters the purine salvage pathway and is converted into its active form, 6-thioguanosine monophosphate, by the enzyme hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT) in humans43. Once converted into an active metabolite, 6-TG is thought to block purine synthesis and be incorporated into DNA, causing cytotoxic effects in eukaryotic cells25,44. Whether 6-TG affects bacteria by exerting mutagenic effects is currently unknown. However, Sun et al. showed that 6-TG interacts with Mycoplasma pneumoniae HPRT to block purine salvage21. This suggests that 6-TG may also antagonize S. aureus through the purine salvage pathway by being activated by HPRT. We are currently investigating the molecular targets of 6-TG and to identify determinants that make S. aureus susceptible to 6-TG. It is well known that certain antibiotics can select for agr mutations and S. aureus strains harboring these mutations become more resistant to these stresses and cause chronic infections45. However, we currently have no evidence to suggest that 6-TG selects for the emergence of these mutants or that agr-negative strains are resistant to 6-TG. In this study, we observed that the agr-negative strain RN4220 is susceptible to the growth-inhibitory effects of 6-TG. Future work will seek to identify mechanisms of resistance against 6-TG in S. aureus and how evolving resistance against this drug affects S. aureus physiology and metabolism. It is becoming increasingly clear that many CoNS, including the species identified in this study that contain the tgs operon, co-colonize with S. aureus and competition between these species for the same niches can provide protection for the host. This work reveals a previously unknown mechanism by which the relatively understudied CoNS can inhibit growth and virulence of more pathogenic bacteria like S. aureus. This, in turn, should spark interest in the discovery of additional genes synthesizing other nucleotide analogs that may be used by bacteria in inter-species bacterial warfare.