DISCUSSION In this study, another new determinant of AZB resistance, aziN, was discovered in the vicinity of the essential AZB resistance gene orf1/alkZ through gene deletion and heterologous expression experiments. BLASTP analysis showed that AziN has homology and similarity with many unidentified members of the vicinal oxygen chelate (VOC) metalloenzyme superfamily, but no putative conserved domains have been detected. In the sequence analysis of the Pfam database, AziN was classified as a member of the Glyoxalase_6 (PF18029) family of proteins due to the presence of a glyoxalase-like domain. This family of proteins contains a diverse set of domains related to the glyoxalase domain, and the specifics of their structure and function are uncertain. There are a few antibiotic resistance proteins in this superfamily, such as MRD, the bleomycin resistance proteins (Blms) and the fosfomycin resistance proteins (FosA/FosB/FosX) (27). Through either sequestration or inactivation, drug activities are prevented by these known resistance proteins (38–40). Unlike them, the specific binding of AziN with AZB had no influence on the antibacterial and crosslinking activities of the drug, suggesting the particular function of AziN. Although the interaction of AziN with Cu2+ was detected, the drug binding ability and the cleavage activity of AziN are both independent of metal ions (Supplementary Figure S4, S5 and S7). We suggest that AziN descended from an ancient metalloenzyme, and its catalytic activity changed after a natural evolutionary process while preserving metal-ion-binding capability, as previously reported as a possible explanation for the functional switching of MRD (41). It is suspected that drug-bind proteins can cooperate with drug-transporting proteins for intracellular drug efflux by capturing and delivering drugs. The drug efflux system, which serves as an elementary resistance mechanism against exogenous and endogenous toxins, is widespread in the cells of most living organisms and particularly plentiful in antibiotic-producing strains and drug-resistant pathogens (14,42,43). In the AZB biosynthetic gene cluster, the transmembrane export protein AziE was verified to play a key role as an efflux pump in resistance to AZB. The single heterologous expression of AziE or AziN can improve AZB resistance in the sensitive strain S. lividans ZX1. AZB production decreased more markedly in the aziN gene deletion mutant than in the aziE gene deletion mutant (Xiaorong Chen and Jing He, unpublished work). Obviously, the functions of the two resistance proteins are not closely linked to each other. AziN was proven exert its drug resistance function by its involvement in ICL repair rather than through drug sequestration and efflux. The first identified AZB binding protein AziR, homologous to aminoglycoside phosphotransferases, can also provide resistance against AZB toxicity to the heterologous hosts S. lividans TK24 and E. coli (31). No chemical modification of AZB was found in the interaction of AziR and the drug, but regrettably, the potential drug sequestration effect of canonical binding proteins has not been tested. Except for aziR, the other three resistance determinants, aziE, alkZ and aziN, are all located within the AZB biosynthetic gene cluster and associated with drug production. Both alkZ and aziN can specifically recognize and excise AZB-ICL DNA. The DNA glycosylase AlkZ catalyses the hydrolysis of the N-glycosidic bond of the alkylated nucleobase to repair ICLs by triggering a BER-like pathway (22), while AziN induces hydrolytic cleavage of the phosphodiester bonds around ICL sites. Without conserved DNA binding domains, the interaction of AziN with ICL DNA is mediated by the drug. AziN has selectivity and specificity for AZB–ICL DNA, a kind of specific DNA structure, rather than for a DNA sequence, behaving as a structure-specific endonuclease. This kind of endonuclease usually resolves specific DNA secondary structures such as single-stranded flaps, stem-loops, Holliday junctions and DNA adducts that arise during DNA damage repair, DNA recombination, DNA replication and transcription stress processes (44). ICL repair also relies on structure-specific endonucleases to cut DNA strands at lesion sites (45–47). Despite the lack of similarity to known endonucleases, the structure-specific endonuclease activity of AziN to cut the damaged strands was verified by an in vitro assay in this study. The repair of ICLs is a complex, multi-step process requiring the cooperation of many DNA repair proteins (1,3). Our research has shown that the protein AziN is involved in the damage recognition and incision steps of the ICL repair process, most likely in cooperation and coordination with other nucleases and regulation factors. The resulting DNA gap is generally filled by downstream translesion synthesis and homologous recombination before the remnant ICL structure is completely removed by NER (Figure 5J). Future intensive studies on the enzymatic and structural characteristics of AziN and screening of its collaborators in ICL repair will set a basis to elucidate the action mode and regulatory mechanism of this new type of structure-specific endonuclease.