3. Discussion In the present study, we demonstrated that salinosporamide A derived from marine life suppresses T cell activation by regulating T cell proliferation and entry into the cell cycle. First, it was clearly confirmed that salinosporamide A was not cytotoxic at concentrations below 10 nM in Jurkat T cells and mouse T cells. Furthermore, it has been reported that treatment with salinosporamide A leads to apoptosis at a higher concentration of 35 nM. Treatment with 10 nM salinosporamide A regulated the ability of Jurkat T cells to proliferate and enter into the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. The abrogated proliferation and cell cycle entry that were observed upon treatment with salinosporamide A were associated with a reduction in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-2 and IFNγ, by T cells in the presence of TCR-mediated stimulation of the NFκB and MAPK pathways. T cells proliferation and entry into the cell cycle are pivotal processes that occur after antigenic engagement with antigen-presenting cells in the early phase of inflammatory conditions [19]. Upon TCR-mediated stimulation, T cell proliferation and cell cycle entry are tightly controlled by several regulatory proteins that undergo proteasomal degradation [20,21]. A recent report has demonstrated that the activity of the proteasome is highly involved in the differentiation of CD8+ T cells into effector and memory T cells [22]. Due to the influence of proteasome inhibitors in regulating various T cell processes, finding the ‘optimal concentration’ that is effective without showing cytotoxicity is important in the pharmacological approach. In the current study, we first validated whether salinosporamide A leads to cytotoxicity in T cells, in a dose-dependent manner, and evaluated its pharmacological effects on T cell proliferation and entry into the cell cycle at a concentration of 10 nM. Although we observed that 40 nM of salinosporamide A induces cellular apoptosis by performing an apoptosis assay [13], we also found that 10 nM of salinosporamide A inhibits T cell activation by abrogating proliferation and entry into the cell cycle. Further studies should be conducted to determine whether 10 nM salinosporamide A or less regulates the functions of T cells, such as differentiation into effector T cells or supervision of immune cells without cytotoxicity. Several proteasome inhibitors have been developed as immunosuppressive reagents, due to their regulatory roles in antigen processing and presentation and in signaling cascades that regulate cellular functions and survival [23]. The biological functions of proteasome inhibitors have been recently identified in immune and cancer cells, and most proteasome inhibitors have been found to attenuate NFκB signaling [24,25]. A previous study has also evaluated a promising proteasome inhibitor as an immunosuppressive reagent in animal and clinical experiments and investigated transplant rejection using specific blocking antibodies and graft versus host disease [26]. Another trial investigated whether bortezomib attenuates autoimmune disorders, including rheumatoid arthritis and Sjögren’s syndrome [27]. Interestingly, bortezomib has been shown to downregulate activated T cell proliferation and IL-2 production, similar to the findings of salinosporamide A in the current study [28,29]. We found that pretreatment with salinosporamide A inhibited T cell activation by repressing T cell proliferation and cell cycle entry. These results suggest that salinosporamide A can be developed as an immunosuppressive reagent to treat autoimmune disorders and transplant rejection.