3. Discussion Genome shuffling enhanced cellulase production in Bacillus subtilis VS15 through the production of improved mutant strains. Mutagenesis using EMS with UV and NTG with UV produced starting strains for genome shuffling. Shuffled strains were then developed by pooling of desired traits through homologous recombination by protoplast fusion. In order to identify the mutations responsible for this enhanced production of cellulase, the whole genome of two strains (Bacillus subtilis wild type VS15 and mutant type Gd7) were sequenced by NGS and compared to Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis str. 168 as a reference genome. After two rounds of genome shuffling, the CMCase, FPase and Cellobiose activity of Gd7 increased to 167%, 75%, and 40%, respectively, over that of wild type VS15 (Table 2). Previous studies [25,26,27] reported that the increased growth rate in mutants allows the cells to utilize nutrients more effectively than their respective wild type strains, suggesting that increased extracellular production of enzyme proteins may contribute to enhanced production of cellulase. Earlier genome shuffling studies reported improved FPase activity in Penicillium decumbens JU-A10 by 117%, 142%, and 118% by UV, EMS, and N+ ion implantation mutagenesis, respectively, after two rounds of shuffling and screening over 2000 shuffled strains [28]. Cellulase activity in Trichoderma viride F161 was enhanced by 1.97 fold using UV irradiation, low-energy ion beam implantation, and Atmospheric Pressure Non-equilibrium Discharge plasma (APNEDP) [13]. Improved FPase and CMCase activity was observed in Aspergillus glaucus HGZ-2 by 1.95 fold and 1.72 fold, respectively, through UV irradiation after two rounds of shuffling [29]. Cellulolytic enzymes were induced and repressed depending on the availability of easily utilizable sugars [14]. Cellulase inducers included sepharose, cellulose, cellobiose, δcellobiose-1-5, lactone, lactose, and other oxidized products of cellulose [30]. In Trichoderma Reesei, two CBH genes (cbh1, cbh2), five endoglucanases genes (Eg1, Eg2, Eg3, Eg4, and Eg5) [31,32] and two b-glucosidase (bgl1/cel3a, bgl2/cel1a) are reported as cellulase producer genes, and five positive transcriptional activators (XYR1, ACE II, HAP 2/3/5, PacC, and AreA) have been identified to play a major role in gene regulation and expression of cellulase. In addition, three repressors (ACE I, Rce1, and CRE I [33,34] have been identified. In Penicillium oxalicum, a novel transcription factor, ClrC, has been identified, which regulates the multiple stress responses and cellulase expression. The absence of ClrC in a mutant strain reduces the induction of cellulase expression [35]. Transcriptional activators play an important role in the regulation of the production of cellulase in fungal species. Two transcription factors (clr-1 and clr-2) from Neurospora crassa which were required for growth have been identified [36]. Phylogenetic analyses also confirmed that clr-1 and clr-2 are conserved in the genomes of filamentous ascomycete fungi capable of degrading cellulose, but is not required for either growth or hemicellulase activity on xylan. A deletion of the clr-2 homolog (clrB) transcription factor in Aspergillus nidulans failed to induce cellulase gene expression, and reduced cellulolytic activity on Avicel was observed [36]. As DBTBS [24] reported, the LicT will regulate the bgIP gene with positive regulation. In the Gd7, one SNP occurred at the actual binding site of bgl gene and three SNPs were observed between 4035735 bp and 4035849 bp compared to the reference strain. These mutations may influence Bgl expression. The mutant GD7 was obtained by genome shuffling. In this regard, a number of mutations were observed (Table 5, Table 7 and Table 9, Figure 3, Figure 4 and Figure 5). The phenotype of enhanced cellulase production could be the result of these mutations. It may not be possible to attribute the activity to a single mutation and its effect. In this regard, the possible role of multiple mutations in a group of genes is proposed. A mutant β-glucosidase (bgl) of Spodoptera frugiperda, obtained by random mutagenesis, increased the rate of the cellulase production [37]. In our study, a SNP was observed in bglH and eglS. However, these mutations may not lead to an affective expression of the cellulase gene since the translated messenger RNA was unchanged. Similarly, mutations in the yxaL gene do not seem to influence the cellulase production. In bacteria, cellulase gene regulation is finely controlled by a regulatory mechanism through two key regulons: CcpA and LicT. Carbon Catabolite Repression (CCR) is referred as a glucose effect. The keys factors involved in the CCR are CcpA, Hpr protein, Hpr kinase/phosphorylase and glycolytic intermediates (G6p and FDP) [38]. In Bacillus subtilis, CCR is mediated by catabolite control protein A (CcpA). Bacteria can prefer the glucose as a primary carbon source, and it cannot utilize any secondary substrate by allowing the CcpA to block several catabolite genes and often also to repress the transcription of alternative sugar pathway operons. CcpA is regulated by its phosphorylated cofactors Hpr and Crh, and its phosphorylation is done by HprK. As such, expression of cellulase cannot happen in the presence of glucose in media. In our study, three mutations were found in the CcpA gene of the mutant compared to the wild type, but since these mutations did not affect the amino acid sequence, the function was not affected. Other studies reported that RL-P37 enhances its cellulase and endoglucanase activity by two-fold [39]. Cre1, which is a CCR protein of T.ressei, was found to be truncated in the hyper producer of cellulase in T. reesei Rut-C30 and demonstrated that Cre1 regulates the cellulase expression [40]. The disruption of CreA gene enhanced the production of cellulase and hemicellulase in A.cellulolyticus [41]. In Bacillus subtilis, CCR mechanism is regulated by the HprK catalyzed phosphorylation of Hpr (ser-46). Maximum levels of Hpr are phosphorylated on strongly repressing substrate, and minimum levels of Hpr phosphorylation are observed on weakly repressing substrates. Hence, the strength of the CCR is dependent upon the activity of the HprK/P –dependent de (phosphorylation) of Hpr. Consequently, low Hpr kinase activity limits CCR by weakly repressing sources [42]. In our study, three unique mutations occurred in the mutant without changing the amino acid sequence, implying no loss of function of HprK gene compared to its wild type (VS15). There are several genes that can lead to inhibition of phospholipid synthesis like gpsA (Cronan et al. 1975 [43]; Loewy 1990 [44], MORBIDONI et al. 1995 [45]). The inhibition of phosphoplipid synthesis can cause leaky surface allowing the enhanced transport of cellulases to the exterior. There could be inhibition of peptidoglycan synthesis without affecting macromolecular synthesis or growth as was noted in E. coli (Rodionov et al. 1996 [46]). Also, there are mutations found in penicillin binding proteins(pbpA, pbpB) with role in cell wall synthesis and elongation( Murray et al. 1997 [47]). The affect on peptidoglycan synthesis can cause the development of a leaky mutant. Cell wall endo-peptidases like YkfC (Xu et al. 2010 [48]), cwlO (Hashimotyo et al. 2012 [49]; Hashimotyo et al. 2018 [50]) can create hurdles in cell wall synthesis. There were mutations in spore coat components of cotT, cotB, spoIIQ or yeeK. Unfavourable conditions like starvation may induce sporulation. Lack of ready substrates like glucose may favour sporulation. However, in order to utilise and grow on alternative substrates like cellulose, the host inactivated sporulation genes. Other surface components included membrane protein, bacteriophage SPP1 receptor(yueB). However, their role cannot be related to cellulase activity. There are mutations to be found in genes related to carbohydrate metabolism like endo-1,4-beta-xylanase(xylanaseD,xynD),beta-galacturonidase(yesZ), alpha;-galacturonidase (lplD), chitosanase(csn). Probably, these genes or pathways compete for the intermediates or metabolites of the pathway involving cellulases. Possibly the metabolites of cellulase activity can act as inducers for these genes or operons, and during selective pressure of the genome shuffling, these genes were silenced. Genes of regulatory origin have also been identified as mutants. These include rsbX(serine phosphatase), gutR (transcriptional regulator of the glucitol operon), yhcZ(two-component response regulator ,YhcY), fatR(transcriptional regulator for cypB), yobD((transcriptional regulator; phage-related; Xre family)). Also deletions/insertions were found in other genes hemN(coproporphyrinogen III oxidase), pKSM(polyketide synthase), rseP (inner membrane zinc metalloprotease required for the extracytoplasmic stress response mediated by sigma€, YaeL), rok (repressor of comK), plipastatin synthetase(PpsC), swrAA (motility and swarming), SwrC(surfactin self-resistance) tuaA(teichuronic acid synthesis). Rok is a repressor of the transcriptional activator ComK and is therefore an important regulator of competence in Bacillus subtilis and is also proved to be a suppressor of membrane bound and secreted proteins. HtpX is an integral cytoplasmic membrane metalloprotease facillitating growth especially at high temperatures is repressed by rok(Lin et al. 2018 [51]). In the event of mutation in rok, the host is able to grow well at high temperatures. Mutant of rok displayed altered colony morphology (Kovacs et al. 2011 [52]). Sigma (E) is required for expression of phospholipids, membrane proteins etc during stress conditions. Inactivation of rseP may cause lack of activity of sigma(E), affecting phospholipid synthesis or membrane synthesis resulting in leaky mutants. The tuaA gene is involved in the incorporation of teichuronic acid into cell walls of B.subtilis (Qi et al. 1998 [53]). The mutations in tuaA may cause decrease in level of teichuronic acid in cell wall, possibly leading to a leaky mutant. The fatR protein represses the expression of the fatR-cyp102A3 operon involved in fatty acid detoxification.Unsaturated fatty acids have the capacity to interact with FatR and prevent repression (Gustafsson et al. 2001 [54]). There is accumulation of fatty acids during inhibition of phospholipid synthesis (like during inactivation of gpsA). Mutation in fatR prevents its repression activity.This may cause the expression of fatR-cyp102A3 operon facilitatiing fatty acid detoxification or surviving fatty acid accumulation. The gene YhcZ forms part of two component regulatory system (YfcZ-YfcY) and promotes glucsoe and carbon source utilisation (Jia et al. 2018). Mutations in the yhcZ may lead to conditions of carbon starvation,activation of the carbon catabolite repressor pathways, that cause induction of cellulase activity. Bacillus subtilis can utilize glucitol as a sole carbon source via the gut operon (Watanabe et al. 2003 [55]). The gene gutR can act as regulator of gut operon. Mutantion of gutR, could cause the host to utilise the xylitol(CHALUMEAU et al. 1978 [56]). Probably, it may also help the host in utilisation of other alternative substrates like cellulose. Sigma(B), stress response sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis, is induced during environmental stress or at low cellular ATP levels.The gene, rsbX is a negative regulator of of sigma(B) (Smirnova et al. 1998 [57]; Teh et al. 2015 [58]). Mutation in rsbX, continues the stress response and possible utilisation of alternative substrates pathways (like cellulases) to replenish ATP levels. The molecular membrane protein chaperon, prsA is also mutated. This chaperon has been implicated in increased secretion of amylase(Quesada-Ganuza et al. 2019 [59]), lipases (Ma et al. 2018 [60]) and several other proteins(Kakeshita et al. 2011 [61]). However, the role of the frameshift mutation in prsA resulting in increased cellulase activity cannot be explained. Similar is the case with mutation in another chaperon, GroeL. Mutation in SwrAA involved in motility and swarming and gamma- poly glutamic acid synthesis was observed(Osera et al. 2009 [62]) . The gene (SwrC) conferring resistance to surfactin produced by the host was also mutated. Also, there were mutations to be found in a polyketide synthesis operon,and the plipastatin production operon. The gene hemN facilitating heme synthesis in anerobic conditions(Hippler et al. 1997 [63]) was mutated. The gene(pucF; allantoate amidohydrolase) involved in purine degradation as nitrogen source(Schultz et al. 2001 [64]) was mutated. However, their role in cellulase activity cannot be predicted.