4. Discussion Soymilk is one of the most popular drinks in Asian and Western countries owing to its extremely nutritive and health-imparting attributes. It contains high-quality proteins, dietary fibers, isoflavones, and unsaturated fatty acids, which are the essential components of a healthy diet. Despite possessing potential health-promoting attributes, its consumption is still being limited due to its undesirable beany flavor and the presence of natural phytic acid, lectins, trypsin inhibitors, and indigestible oligosaccharides [77]. There is a strong need for efficient processing for soymilk preparation that removes these undesirable components and further enhances its nutritive and functional attributes. Heating could be performed to minimize the undesirable flavor caused due to the degradation or oxidation of lipids. It inactivates the lipoxygenase enzyme and thereby reduces the undesirable flavor of soymilk. However, inactivating the lipoxygenase could also lead to the destruction of other nutritional factors such as amino acids, antioxidants, isoflavones, phenolics, and thus, is not recommended in the case of soymilk preparations [2]. Another approach could be the extraction of lipid-based substrates responsible for unwanted flavors; however, complete extraction of lipids is still not feasible. The most effective and reliable approach to improve the quality and flavor of soymilk is by utilizing a LAB fermentation process. The fermentation of soymilk using GRAS-LAB not only enhances its shelf life but also improves its overall acceptability, desirability, nutrition, and health-promoting characteristics [77]. The fermentation of soymilk using galactosidase-producing LAB strains also reduces the raffinose and stachyose contents to improve its digestibility. It has been reported that in the case of soymilk fermentation using Lactobacillus acidophilus, the pH of the drink is lowered due to lactic acid accumulation. Moreover, the soymilk fermentation by L. acidophilus also masked the beany flavor and enhanced its sensory attributes [5]. Fermentation by bifidobacteria has also been reported to improve the quality of soymilk by enhancing the digestibility of the proteins and by reducing the contents of the unwanted oligosaccharides [78]. In another study, soymilk was fermented for 4 h using Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis Bb12 to produce multifunctional soymilk having additional benefits of probiotics [77]. In a separate study, functional soymilk was produced by optimizing the soaking (12–24 h) and germination periods (48–96 h) of soybeans. Optimization of the sprouting conditions of soybeans also resulted in increased contents of proteins, amino acids, and total phenolics along with a reduction in the phytic acid content and trypsin inhibitory activity. This has led to the development of high-quality and extremely nutritious soymilk [79]. In addition, fermentation of soymilk containing 3% w/v okra flour (tofu fermentation residue) using L. acidophilus LA3, enhanced the organic acid content as well as its angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitory activity that augmented the health-promoting responses [4]. Soymilk fermentation with probiotic Limosilactobacillus fermentum BM-325 strain was also carried out to enhance its ACE inhibitory activity, which increased up to 60%, and a fermentation time of 4 h was proposed to be most suitable to increase the bioactivity of the soymilk [5]. In another study, Lactobacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis, and Streptococcus salivarius subsp. thermophilus fermented whey was used during the soybean-soaking process for the production of functional soymilk. The soymilk thus produced had higher contents of isoflavones and γ-amino butyric acid (GABA). The pH of the soymilk was reduced from 6.75 to 5.19, whereas the titratable acidity increased from 0.18 to 0.24%. The total solid content of soymilk was reduced substantially from 7.38 to 1.54%,while with the increase in the soaking time of soybeans, isoflavones content decreased significantly but valuable aglycones increased—threefold [26]. Kim, Lee, and Yoo [26] revealed the positive effects of Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus and Streptococcus salivarius subsp. thermophilus during the fermentation of soymilk by enhancing the amino acids and antioxidants content. However, further post-fermentation sterilization exhibited a detrimental effect on the texture and antioxidant activity probably due to the degradation of certain important but heat-sensitive bioactive compounds that eventually decreased the overall acceptability [21]. Thus, fermenting soymilk with probiotic LAB strains for specified time periods could be highly beneficial in making it a unique multifunctional food. Similarly, the functional and sensory attributes of buttermilk were also improved after LAB fermentation. Buttermilk is a rich source of vitamins, proteins, and valuable fats. Its balanced nutritional composition also strengthens its nutraceutical and health-promoting claims [9]. Buttermilk has been described in two different types i.e., traditional and cultured, according to their method of preparation. Traditional buttermilk is generally the leftover liquid obtained from churning the LAB-fermented cream into butter [80,81]. However, the cultured buttermilk is obtained by the fermentation of pasteurized skimmed milk using efficient LAB starter cultures such as Lactococcus lactis and Leuconostoc mesenteroides sp. [82]. In a previous study, the fermentation of buttermilk was carried out using a proteolytic strain of Lactobacillus helveticus to prepare a peptide-enriched powder with improved functional and gut-modulating properties [8]. Thus, earlier studies have evidenced that LAB-fermented buttermilk with enhanced nutritional, flavor, and functional properties would be highly impactful in justifying its functional label. The present study was aimed to impart natural flavor and added nutrition to the soymilk and buttermilk during fermentation using Pediococcus acidilactici BD16 (alaD+). Probiotic Pediococcus are generally recognized as safe (GRAS) facultative anaerobes with homo fermentative, Gram-positive, and catalase-negative properties that belong to the bacterial family Streptococcaceae and are used extensively in various biotechnological and food applications [83,84]. Currently, the genus Pediococcus comprises a group of species including P. acidilactici, P. argentinicus, P. cellicola, P. damnosus, P. ethanolidurans, P. inopinatus, P. parvulus, P. pentosaceus, P. siamensis, and P. stilesii. However, only two species i.e., P. acidilactici and P. pentosaceus, are utilized for the fermentation of dairy products [85]. P. acidilactici strains possess interesting properties such as resistance to gastric acids and bile salts. They are also reported to produce many broad-spectrum and heat-resistant antimicrobial peptides known as pediocins, which could control the growth of food spoilage and disease-causing bacteria. Such properties make them attractive candidates for food biopreservation [86]. P. acidilactici has already got GRAS status (GRN no. 000171, awarded by Food and Drug Administration); thus, it could be utilized as a probiotic food additive as per WHO guidelines on food and feed additives [20]. It has also got the QPS (The Qualified Presumption of Safety) status recommended by the European Food Safety Authority vide no. EFSA-Q-2018-00268 [87]. Native P. acidilactici BD16 MTCC10973 was isolated from a milk product and characterized for its biochemical, molecular, and organoleptic properties for its potential application as a probiotic food and feed additive [20,32,88,89]. Previously, native P. acidilactici BD16 was used for vanillin production on a rice bran medium in the presence of ferulic acid as an inducer, with a production yield of 1.269 g/L crude vanillin [88]. To further enhance its vanillin production capacity, a synthetic vanillin gene cassette, bearing fcs and ech genes encoding feruloyl-CoA synthetase and enoyl-CoA hydratase, was cloned using the shuttle vector pLES003. The pLES003 vector reportedly enhanced the heterologous gene expression and phenolic biotransformation’s in the recombinant strain for improving vanillin production [20]. After metabolic engineering and scale-up of the process, 4 g/L vanillin was recovered from the recombinant cell culture, which is approximately four-fold higher than the yield obtained using native strain. Later, recombinant P. acidilactici BD16 (fcs+/ech+) was also explored to enhance flavor and aroma characteristics of the wines during the secondary fermentation process due to increased production of cinnamic acid derivatives. Mass spectral analysis revealed the development of many bioactive phenolic compounds such as apigenin, catechin, coniferyl aldehyde, cyanidin, hydroxybenzoic acids, laricitrin, luteolin, malvidin 3-glucoside, myricetin, naringenin, pelargonin, piceatannol, quercetin, and vanillin during fermentation, which could attribute for the improvement of organoleptic and nutritional properties of the fermented food products. This study also highlighted the role of recombinant P. acidilactici BD16 (fcs+/ech+) in the production of several phenolic derivatives including vanillin during fermentation, which play a characteristic role in determining the organoleptic properties and thus contributing to the aroma, color, and flavor of the finished product [32].These studies have shown a path for further exploring novel properties of the recombinant P. acidilactici BD16 for food-based applications. Thus, in the present study, the recombinant P. acidilactici BD16 (alaD+) strain (containing the pLES003 plasmid-bearing synthetic alaD gene) was utilized as a starter culture candidate for the insitu L-alanine production and for imparting sweetness, nutritional, and health-promoting attributes to the fermented buttermilk and soymilk. Biosafety assessment and evaluation of the probiotic attributes of recombinant P. acidilactici BD16 (alaD+) was also carried out to study its food-based applications. Experimental trials were conducted for evaluation of itshemolytic, gelatinase, and DNase activities, which were not detected in the recombinant strain, thus proving it to be safe for human consumption (unpublished data). The developed strain greatly influenced the functional, nutritional as well as bioactive potential of the fermented drinks. Enhanced levels of antioxidants, phenolics, flavonoids, and L-alanine after LAB fermentation have been responsible for the improved functional and quality attributes of the developed functional drinks. GC-MS-based metabolomic fingerprinting further persuasively strengthened the argument of the P. acidilactici (alaD+) strain as a starter culture bacterium for the development of functional drinks. However, the authors strongly recommend further research on enhancing the shelf life of fermented functional drinks to boost their market value and consumer acceptability.