3. Discussion 3.1. Salt Stress Adversely Affects Seed Germination of F. Tataricum Soil salinization is just one of the negative environmental impacts experienced globally as industries strive to increase crop production and yields [18]. Seed germination is the initial and most critical stage in the crop life cycle, and its germination is severely affected by salt stress. As evidenced by the preliminary experiment of this study (Table 1), in which 50 mmol L−1 NaCl significantly reduced the GP, GR, and GI of F. tataricum seeds, and significantly inhibited their VI and SL, by more than 75.0% (Table 1). F. tataricum seeds are clearly adversely affected by salt stress, as their GP, GR, GI, VI, SL, SFW, RL, RSA, RAD, and RV all decreased significantly under NaCl treatment alone (Figure 1, Figure 2, Figure 3 and Figure 4, Table 2). High extracellular NaCl concentrations create a water potential gradient that draws water from the inside of the cell to the outside. Plants frequently respond by closing their stomata to reduce cell transpiration and prevent cells from absorbing water from the outside [19]. Interestingly, this study found that the RFW of F. tataricum seeds increased slightly in a 50 mmol L−1 NaCl environment, which might be related to its adaptive strengths as a more tolerant variety (Table 2). F. tataricum is better adapted to unfavorable environments such as soils with high salinity and alkalinity and is able to better utilize the resources available in these adverse conditions. It can increase its material accumulation, transportation, and distribution to improve its survival capability. In nature, high salinity environments have many adverse effects on crops, causing the increase and accumulation of intracellular and intercellular antioxidant enzymes, membrane lipid peroxidation, and osmotic adjustment substances [20], protecting cell structure and improving self-resistance. 3.2. H2O2 Pretreatment Alleviates the Negative Effects of NaCl Stress on Seed Germination in F. Tataricum Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is an exogenous signal substance involved in plant growth regulation and plays a crucial role in their physiological response to adversity. There were some reports on the use of H2O2 to improve seed germination. For example, H2O2 application at suitable concentrations alleviated the inhibition of pistachio seed germination under salt stress [21]; reduced the oxidative damage to rape seedlings under low-temperature conditions [9]; and enhanced the growth of wheat and the efficiency of its antioxidant defense systems under drought stress [22]. Due to differences in crop varieties and treatment methods, the optimal concentration at which exogenous H2O2 should be applied to alleviate NaCl stress is also diverse. In this study, the germination of F. tataricum seeds under NaCl stress was distinctly improved by treatments of different H2O2 concentrations (Figure 1). Furthermore, the growth of F. tataricum seedlings was enhanced significantly (Figure 2, Table 2), the amount of active oxygen was increased, and the accumulation of osmotic adjustment substances was promoted (Figure 3 and Figure 4). Under NaCl stress and increasing H2O2 concentrations, all indices (except for POD and MDA) increased first and then decreased (Figure 1A–D, Figure 2A,B, Table 2, Figure 3A,B and Figure 4B). SL and RL increased as the H2O2 concentration increased from 0.1–50 mmol L−1, indicating that concentrations of H2O2 in that range promoted the growth of F. tataricum seedlings aboveground and underground (Figure 2A, Table 2). In treatments of 0.1–20 mmol L−1 H2O2, GP, GR, and VI of F. tataricum seeds were alleviated (Figure 1A–D); SFW, RV, RFW, and CAT were increased (Figure 2B, Table 2, Figure 3A); and the content of MDA was reduced (Figure 4A). These results indicate that seed vigor was enhanced by treatment within this concentration range. Furthermore, the material accumulation of seedlings was promoted, and the oxidative damage and membrane damage caused by NaCl stress was reduced. POD activity first decreased and then increased with increasing H2O2 treatment concentration (Figure 3C). One explanation may be that under NaCl stress, peroxisomes were inhibited through redox reactions in cell metabolism during the germination of F. tataricum seeds. This subsequently limits the mitigation of NaCl-associated toxic effects by hydrogen peroxide, oxidized phenols and other substances. Another explanation may be that during the germination period of F. tataricum, POD activity in its tissues is weak, and the impact of 50 mmol L−1 NaCl was not strong enough to cause a significant increase in this enzyme’s activity (Figure 3C). Furthermore, pretreatment with H2O2 can alleviate the negative effects of NaCl on the germination characteristics of F. tataricum (Figure 1A–D); promote the growth and material accumulation of above-ground and underground parts of the germinated seeds (Figure 2A,B, Table 2); increase the antioxidant enzyme activity and osmotic adjustment substance content in the seedlings (Figure 3A,B and Figure 4B); and reduce the peroxidation of the cell membrane (Figure 4A). However, although low H2O2 concentrations promote seed germination, high H2O2 concentrations may poison seeds. As the concentration of H2O2 is increased, its mitigation effect on NaCl stress is first enhanced and then weakened. Our results suggest that pretreatment with H2O2 of concentration 5–10 mmol L−1 has the best mitigation effect. 3.3. Analyses Reveal Six Key Indices to Evaluate the Salt Tolerance of F. Tataricum Salt tolerance in F. tataricum is a complex trait. Researchers have used a variety of methods to evaluate and screen traits that indicate salt tolerance in crop varieties. In this study, a hierarchical cluster analysis and correlation analysis were used to investigate the correlation between various indicators of NaCl stress and the effects of all treatments (Figure 5 and Figure 6). The maximum values of most indicators resulted from the CK, NaCl + 5 mmol L−1 H2O2, and NaCl + 10 mmol L−1 H2O2 treatments (Figure 5). Correlation analysis showed that there was a significant positive correlation among germination parameters, among above-ground indices, and underground indices; and that enzymatic activity was correlated positively or negatively among themselves (Figure 6). When looking at the results of both the cluster analysis and the correlation analysis, the significant relationship between treatments, agronomic traits, and physiological traits can be seen clearly (Figure 5 and Figure 6). Through PCA, this study obtained three new independent principal components with a cumulative contribution rate of 88.411% (Table 3). Concurrently, stepwise regression was used to establish the optimal regression equation for predicting the salt tolerance between the comprehensive evaluation D value and various salt tolerance indicators under H2O2 seed soaking and NaCl stress. PCA and correlation analysis revealed six key indicators that had a significant impact on the salt tolerance characteristics of F. tataricum. These were GP, SFW, RSA, RAD, CAT, and SOD, respectively. Our results suggest that treatment of 5–10 mmol L−1 H2O2 could enhance seed vigor, promote seedling growth, and increase enzymatic activity to effectively alleviate the toxic effects, oxidative damage, and osmotic imbalance caused by NaCl stress (Figure 5 and Figure 6, Table 3).