Discussion A pan-genome, defined as the entire set of non-orthologous genes in a specified group of strains (Tettelin et al., 2008), may reveal gene clusters of special interest as those related with specific niches or involved in the production of bioactive compounds (Medini et al., 2005). This study aims to determine the pan-genome or supra-genome of the genus Streptomyces. From all genomes available in NCBI, only 121 complete genomes with high quality assemblies were selected for the analysis. In addition, two approaches to compute the gene families or clusters were explored: the sequence similarity, using the software Roary (Page et al., 2015), and, based on the presence of common protein domains, using the R package Micropan (Snipen and Liland, 2015). The analysis with Roary exposes a pan-genome size of 145,462 gene families; 94.7% of them corresponds to cloud genes. This finding is consistent with the study of Xu et al. (2019) who uncovered 123,302 clusters in 87 genomes of Streptomyces derived from marine ecosystems; the authors used genomes with completeness above 95% and employed an identity of 50% for clustering, which can impact the pan-genome size. In another study, 39,893 gene families across the genus were determined in a study using a similar number of Streptomyces strains (122; McDonald and Currie, 2017). To generate gene families, the authors used Proteinortho v2 (Lechner et al., 2011) with default parameters; this tool uses a low value of percent identity (25%) as a threshold, which might be the cause of any difference with our results. Besides, many of the genomes the authors used are fragmented, which can introduce errors in pan-genome calculations (Tonkin-Hill et al., 2020). A recent paper reported a pan-genome size of 106,000 genes and 1,018 core genes by using 125 complete Streptomyces genomes and a percent similarity threshold of 40% in BLASTp (Lorenzi et al., 2021); this might explain the differences with the present study, although, the core genes number is quite similar to the soft-core genes that we calculated. What is remarkable in these two approaches is the similar value of gamma (γ) in the mathematical fit of the genome size (0.62 compared to the 0.6 obtained in this work). As the identity of the strains used in both studies also differs, this similar gamma (γ) value states that the quality of the genomes is the most important feature to obtain reliable results and predictions. Using the pan-genome size estimation performed by BinomixEstimate (273,372 clusters) and the value of gamma (γ), we estimate that around 284 genomes are necessary to determine the complete reservoir of genes in the genus Streptomyces. The number of strains used may also cause a bias in the analysis. Because of this, related pan-genomic studies in Streptomyces determined significantly less clusters than those found in this investigation (Kim et al., 2015; Tian et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2017b; Jackson et al., 2018; Almeida et al., 2019). We also observed that the core genome size is higher in those studies that include few genomes, obtaining values greater than 2,000 core gene families (Zhou et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2015; Tian et al., 2016); this value tends to decrease as more genomes are added. To our knowledge, no previous characterization of the pan-genome of the genus Streptomyces has been performed based on protein domains. This is an alternative approach that is robust against errors in predicting of protein coding genes, which reduces the variation in annotation between genomes (Snipen and Ussery, 2013). Surprisingly, the number of clusters reduces dramatically compared to the calculations carried out by Roary, although, the number of core genes remains similar. It is possible to argue that many proteins without domain annotations are discarded in the Micropan analysis and that is the case of cloud proteins, which are poorly characterized because they are less frequently found and therefore less studied. This inference is supported by the fact that COG annotations of core genomes of both methods are quite consistent, while the proportion of COG categories in the shell and cloud genomes differs markedly. Conversely, the threshold used to consider a protein as belonging to the same cluster could be high if we consider that we are characterizing a genus with enormous genetic variety. Nevertheless, some proteins can have similar function and therefore similar domains in their structures; as a result, their protein sequence identity can still be low to be clustered in the same group even if we reduce the threshold. This idea is strengthened by an additional analysis with the pipeline BPGA (Chaudhari et al., 2016) using a 50% of identity. Here, 662 core gene families were obtained; this outcome is very similar to the sizes reported by the methods used in the present study. Moreover, we also found a higher number of unique genes (48,315, data not shown), which were less than those found with Roary, where the threshold was 70%. The gap between the number of clusters, from Roary and Micropan, could be attributed to false predicted “genes,” which do not align correctly to other clusters producing an increase in the number of unique genes or singletons (Snipen and Ussery, 2013). Further, overestimation of cloud genes has been previously reported when using Roary and other methods, not based on protein domains, to estimate pan-genome sizes (Tonkin-Hill et al., 2020). Regarding the diversity of the Streptomyces spp., the genomic fluidity and the Jaccard distance were determined for the pan-genomes produced by Roary and Micropan. These results seem to be consistent with an open pan-genome with a high and diverse gene content. Overall, fluidity values tend to be low for species and increase as genetic distance arises, e.g., for Emiliania huxleyi (Read et al., 2013) and for Burkholderia pseudomallei (Spring-Pearson et al., 2015) this value has been estimated in 0.1 and 0.17, respectively; a notable exception is Cronobacter sakazakii which has a fluidity of 0.875, which indicates a large accessory genome pool of this specie (Lee and Andam, 2019). At the level of genus Kislyuk et al. (2011) calculated a fluidity value around 0.9 for the genus Frankia, which belongs to the phylum Actinobacteria. In a recent study, a value of 0.12 was obtained for Streptomyces rimosus (Park and Andam, 2019). We considered the fluidity value for Streptomyces spp. as a reasonable assessment strategy of the genus’ diversity; this value reveals the enormous diversity of strains exposed to different lifestyles and habitats, and therefore, prone to acquire genetic material through lateral transfer so as to obtain better adaptations to their environments; undoubtedly, this results in a wide range of the genome sizes and protein coding genes in streptomycetes (see Supplementary Figure S2). Consequently, some strains have almost the double of protein coding genes. Micropan results are more difficult to compare because this methodology is less employed in pan-genomic studies, yet the fluidity obtained with this software is quite low compared with the one obtained with Roary. It may indicate that, in terms of functionality of the genomes, the dissimilarity diminishes around 20%; therefore, many clusters, which are separated when sequence similarity is used to form them, can have the same or similar function due to the presence of the same domains in its sequence. Small RNAs play an important role in post-transcriptional control of messenger RNA expression and regulate diverse processes, e.g., carbon metabolism, iron homeostasis, RNA polymerase function, virulence, biofilm formation, oxidation, outer membrane perturbation, cellular accumulation of sugar-phosphates and plasmid replication (Richards and Vanderpool, 2011). Trans-encoded regulatory sRNAs are located at sites distinct from those of their target genes and they are typically encoded and enriched in the conserved IGRs of bacterial genomes (Tsai et al., 2015). Therefore, a precise determination of conservation of IGR is a crucial stage in small-RNAs studies as this is typically the first step in the computational identification of these important regulators in bacteria (Rossi et al., 2016; Fuli et al., 2017). Some software use this information to predict novel sRNAs in bacterial genomes such as RNAz (Gruber et al., 2010) and QRNA (Sridhar and Gunasekaran, 2013). Since little is known about the abundance and function of sRNA in Gram-positive bacteria like Streptomyces (Engel et al., 2020), an accurate determination of the conservation of IGRs and its dependency with phylogenetic distance is necessary for a proper estimation of regulatory RNAs encoding potential (Tsai et al., 2015). The current analysis shows that IGRs conservation is reduced at the level of genus and the conservation is still low in smaller groups, when strains are grouped according to the three clades obtained in the phylogenetic tree. However, these rarely conserved IGRs can harbor regulatory function since novel putative non-coding RNAs (nc-RNAs) were detected in these regions; the role of these putative ncRNAs is an interesting question because a high selection pressure must act to conserve these sequences in species with an enormous diversity such as streptomycetes indicating their participation in controlling multiple metabolic processes. As a first approach, we investigated the interaction of these molecules with other functional RNAs showing that numerous mRNAs with diverse annotations (Supplementary File S2) can interact with these predicted regulators. By other hand, we hypothesize that reducing the genetic distance among species will produce trustworthy alignments, which plays a key role in the RNAs structure prediction and will improve the bioinformatics predictions. This is reinforced by the fact that, when the analysis is made in more related strains, i.e., at the level of species, IGRs are well preserved. Therefore, the current analysis lays the foundations for further studies involving computational predictions of sRNAs and their regulatory mechanism in species with biotechnological application such as S. clavuligerus, S. hygroscopicus, S. lydicus, and S. albus. A high confidence phylogenetic tree, using 633 markers, was obtained as a result of core genome determination in the pan-genome analysis. Overall, there is a strong resemblance with earlier phylogenomic analysis performed in Streptomyces by Martín-Sánchez et al. (2019) who used 93 complete Streptomyces genomes and 575 markers. McDonald and Currie (2017) also obtained similar results, though their analysis included fragmented genomes and the bootstrap values of some branches were less than 0.7, which is considered a low bootstrap support. In that study, the number of markers was inferior (94), and many genomes were fragmented. Thus, as it was already highlighted, our first and foremost priority would be to decide on high quality genomes for confident evolutionary analysis. What is striking in our analysis is the correlation found during ANI determination for strains with values above 95%, and their position in the core genome tree. Together with the core genome tree, ANI calculations consider only the part of the genome, where alignments can be built (Richter et al., 2016). Global alignments of strains with ANI values above 95% support differences among genomes despite the high conservation in their core genes (Supplementary Figures S22–S31); hence, it should be noted that genomic analyses along with biochemical and physiological characterizations are still necessary for the correct taxonomic classification of microorganisms. By way of illustration, S. coelicolor A3(2) and S. lividans TK24 possess an ANI value that suggests they are the same species, or even the same strain, but their phenotypic behavior differs markedly. Streptomyces lividans TK24 produces small amounts of the antibiotics actinorhodin and undecylprodigiosin compared to S. coelicolor A3(2) (Rückert et al., 2015). With the advent of new and complete genomes, a deep analysis should be performed for a possible taxonomic re-classification of the species mentioned in Supplementary Figures S22–S31 (special attention must be paid to S. hygroscopicus XM201). The genus Streptomyces is characterized for its metabolic capacity of producing a wide range of metabolites with high societal impact (Pham et al., 2019) and is still one of the most studied genera. Streptomyces is the genus with most entries in the MIBiG database by far (636 entries, search made on January 31, 2021), followed by Aspergillus and Pseudomonas. Previous genome mining studies have been developed in the genus Streptomyces. Our findings correlate well with results previously reported by Belknap et al. (2020). Using antiSMASH 4.1 they predicted that NRPS, PKS1, terpenes, and lantipeptides were the most common BGCs, and S. rhizosphaericus NRRL B-24304 (not included in our study) carried the highest number of BGCs (n=83). The slight differences between our results and results reported in 2020 might be caused by improvements in BGC detection found in newer versions of antiSMASH (Blin et al., 2019), as well as the number of genomes analyzed and their quality. In our study, the ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptide (RiPP) clusters bottromycin and cyanobactin were only found in S. scabiei 87.22, and S. lydicus A02, respectively. Surprisingly, as far as we know, there are no reports of cyanobactin expression in Streptomyces strains; cyanobactin clusters were previously identified in S. lydicus A02 and S. venezuelae genomes using the genome mining tool BAGEL3 (Poorinmohammad et al., 2019). Bottromycin, however, is already described in S. scabies DSM 41658 (Vior et al., 2020). In a recent study, where 1,110 genomes of Streptomyces strains were analyzed (including incomplete genomes), cyanobactin and bottromycin clusters were identified in seven and 17 genomes, respectively (Belknap et al., 2020), demonstrating that, despite the fact that these BGCs were rarely found in the set of genomes we analyzed, it does not mean that other BGCs could not be present in other Streptomyces strains out of the scope of the present study. Cluster similarity analysis demonstrated that terpenes are also highly similar in the genus as previously reported (Martín-Sánchez et al., 2019). Siderophore and ectoine are also highly similar probably due to their primary role in iron acquisition and stress protectant, respectively (Jones et al., 2019; Richter et al., 2019). Intriguingly, one third of the predicted cluster regions did not display similarity with other predicted or reported region, and only one fifth of the prioritized antibiotics are similar to a reported cluster, demonstrating the capacity of the genus to produce diverse compounds. It is well established that BGCs of known antibiotics produced by Streptomyces are co-localized with self-resistance enzymes, e.g., streptomycin and cephamycin C produced by S. griseus and S. clavuligerus, respectively (Supplementary File S3). Regions containing both clusters were successfully found by ARTS along with other 478 regions with co-localized self-resistance enzymes. The challenge now is the creation of strategies to prioritize the identification of BGCs with novel antibiotic activity within the increasing genomic data. As an approach to rationalize the seek for antibiotics, Culp et al. (2020) proposed that identifying BGCs with low similarity and lacking known resistance determinants could lead to the detection of antibiotics with novel mechanisms of action. Following this strategy, they identified two glycopeptide bacteriostatics with an unknown mechanism of action (Culp et al., 2020). Thus, the identification of BGCs nearby self-resistance enzymes along with duplicated core genes with predicted HGT, seems to be a promissory approach to identify BGCs that potentially produce new antibiotics with a predicted mode of action; this approach is currently used in the quest for new antibiotic clusters (Yan et al., 2020) and led to the discovery of thiolactomycin in Salinispora pacifica (Tang et al., 2015). ARTS is the first tool to incorporate these parameters that could derive more confident predictions (Tran et al., 2019); it is a powerful tool and user friendly for a high throughput identification of BGCs for potential antibiotic biosynthesis. Despite its ease of use and how informative is, only few studies have incorporated ARTS in their methodologies. In this regard, we call the attention to the analysis of marine myxobacterial strains, which revealed these strains contain a high number of self-resistance genes, e.g., E. salina DSM 15201 contains 13 self-resistance genes (Moghaddam et al., 2018). We strongly recommend that bioinformatics tools such as ARTS should be incorporated in further studies aimed at seeking for new antibiotics. Using ARTS, we prioritized the search of cluster regions with a predicted mode of action. As part of our predictions, we successfully identified the pentalenolactone cluster, which targets indeed the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Cane and Sohng, 1989). Some of the prioritized regions are co-localized with more than one self-resistance gene that could increase the probability of an antibiotic activity. The most promising of the prioritized regions could be the region 23 of Streptomyces sp. ZFG47 and the region 18 of S. avermitilis MA-4680 since both displayed a similarity with the antibiotic curamycin from Streptomyces cyaneus (Figure 6C; Table 1). Parameters like duplication and HGT of core genes should be used carefully if the purpose is the identification of any type of antibiotics, since filters with these parameters exclude the high number of clusters settled nearby core and self-resistance genes, which, along with biosynthetic clusters of antibiotics already known, might be potentially used for metabolic reengineering strategies to produce new antibiotic scaffolds. It is worth stressing that the metabolic potential of the genus Streptomyces goes beyond antibiotics, and with every new discovered species, we may possibly be amazed by their metabolic complexity and richness. Without a doubt, this genus is and apparently will continue to be one of the most fascinating to be studied.