4. Discussion Despite their intriguing structure, and variations therein, the large size of their Pfam superfamily with nearly 39,000 members, and their relative abundance in one of the most ancient and important organisms on earth, i.e., oxygenic cyanobacteria, the biochemical function of PRPs remains remarkably elusive. To date, there are only two examples where the explicit biochemical function of a PRP is known, as discussed in this review. The first cellular function being that of conferring antibiotic resistance to fluoroquinoline antibiotics through the biochemical function of acting as DNA gyrase inhibitors, such as MfpA and the Qnr family of proteins, that exert their function by acting as a DNA mimic, binding to the complex of DNA gyrase and DNA, and blocking binding of fluoroquinoline to the DNA gyrase DNA complex, and therefore blocking its antibiotic activity. The second clear function is seen in SV2C that functions as a BoNT/A receptor in the synaptic vesicles of neurons. In this activity, the BoNT/A toxin binds to the SV2C PRP luminal domain of a synaptic vesicle neurotransmitter membrane protein, with the binding interaction mediated by a dovetailing of the β-strands of the BoNT/A neurotoxin with an exposed β-strand edge of the PRP luminal domain, resulting in the formation of an extended β-sheet that spans and crosses over the PRP luminal domain and the BoNT/A neurotoxin molecule. This completes the list of examples for which a PRP or a PRP domain of a larger protein is known to carry out a specific biochemical function that directly involves the PRP structure itself. From there, our understanding of PRP function becomes less clear. We have seen that PRP domains are present in the SopA ubiquitination inhibitor whose biochemical function is to bind to TRIM56 and TRIM65 and block the host immune response of interferon production that would normally stimulate proteasome targeting of the bacterial proteins as part of the host immune response to infection; however, the PRP domain of SopA does not directly interact with the targeted TRIM proteins leaving the precise function of the PRP domain of SopA in question. From here, a biochemical function has been associated with a few other PRPs, e.g., the prototypical HglK protein was associated with localization of glycolipids to the heterocyst outer layer, but the structure of HglK is unknown and the precise biochemical function of HglK remains unknown. The same is true for RfrA, for which a putative role in regulating an uncharacterized manganese uptake system was proposed, but the structure of RfrA and the nature of the putative manganese uptake system remains uncharacterized. Similarly, HetL has been shown to play a role in regulating heterocyst differentiation, and the structure of HetL has been determined, but no connection between the structure and the proposed biochemical function has been elucidated. The remaining structure/function space of the PRP superfamily remains completely uncharacterized. What we can deduce at this point regarding the structure and function of PRPs, and multi-domain proteins containing PRP domains, is that in some cases the function is a consequence of the shape and electrostatic surface potential of the PRP, as is observed in the case of DNA mimicry in MfpA [6] and the Qnr family of proteins [3,30,34,35,37,38,39,40,41]. In other cases, the PRP domain makes a direct interaction with another protein to mediate its function, such as with the SV2C-LD binding to BoNT/A [58,59,60,61]. In other cases, the PRP domain simply acts as a scaffold to provide a surface to support binding interactions with another protein, as was observed in the ubiquitin E3 ligases [44,49]. We have seen that variations on the PRP scaffold structure can play functional roles, such as the extra-β-helix loop excursions observed in some Qnr-family proteins, such as QnrB1 [18,33] and AhQnr [20], which appear to play critical roles in guiding interactions with the DNA gyrase. We have also observed many subtle variations in Rfr fold structures that may turn out to be important to function, including small bulges that project from the β-helix structure, variations in the compositions of the β-turns, i.e., the mixture of type I, type II, and type IV β turns, which cause subtle changes in the β-helix dimensions or β-helix twist [21], as well as the presence or absence of N-terminal or C-terminal capping α-helices, and whether or not the PRP constitutes a domain in a multidomain protein. In closing, while the structure-space of PRPs becomes richer, our understanding of the biochemical function of members of the PRP superfamily lags increasingly behind. Targeted and carefully designed studies are required to begin to chip away at expanding our understanding the repertoire of structures and functions of the enigmatic members of the PRP superfamily.