4. Discussion A plethora of microbial strains have been harnessed for their capacity to produce L-alanine at the laboratory scale (Table 1). In the case of wild type microbial strains, such as Micrococcus sp., Pyrococcus furiosus, Salmonella typhimurium, etc., limited production titers and poor racemic resolution were observed [41,42]. Later on, with the development of genetically modified strains, further enhancement of the fermentative production titers of L-alanine was observed. However, L-alanine production using recombinant strains remained challenging due to the requirement of long fermentation hours, lesser stability, poor yield, less purity and co-product formation. This has led to the implementation of advanced strain improvement approaches, such as metabolic engineering, for the development of highly stable and robust L-alanine producing microbial strains capable of withstanding the fermentation pressures of large scale industrial fermenters. The concept of metabolic engineering for L-alanine production was first adopted by Uhlenbusch and co-workers, who engineered a Gram-negative, ethanologenic bacterium Zymomonas mobilis by expressing the Bacillus sphaericus alaD gene. Despite high intracellular L-alanine levels of 23.1 g/L (260 mM) at the beginning of the excretion phase, a subsequent decrease in the alanine yield (7.5 g/L, 80–90 mM after 24 h) was observed along with co-product formation. This might be due to the end product degradation or because of the fact that the central metabolism of Zymomonas mobilis is naturally optimized for directing the glycolytic flux towards ethanol due to translational competition [18]. A homolactic L. lactis strain was converted into homo-alanine by the disruption of the L-lactate dehydrogenase gene (ldh) along with the overexpression of the B. sphaericus alaD gene under the control of the nisA promoter. However, only 13 g/L (146 mM) of D,L-alanine was produced from 18 g/L of glucose [2]. This study also highlights the extensive role of codon biasing and presence of highly active competing pathways in the heterologous host. Further, a strain of E. coli was genetically engineered using the pTrc99A-alaD plasmid for the heterologous expression of B. sphaericus alaD under the control of a strong promoter. A two-phase fermentation process, codon biasing, translational competition between the lactate dehydrogenase and AlaDH enzymes for pyruvate could have led to low alanine titers of 32 g/L (359 mM) in 27 h [3] Then, in 2006, Smith and coworkers engineered an E. coli strain using extensive gene knockouts and reported an 88 g/L (988 mM) alanine production in 48 h. The use of multicopy plasmids, undoubtedly, has raised the fermentation productivity of L-alanine, but, at the same time, the nutritionally complex media formulation has aroused a need of multistage fermentation process and racemic bioconversion [36]. Further, in 2007, an E. coli strain was metabolically engineered with the integration of the G. stearothermophillus alaD gene and knockout of competing pathways genes, such as pflB, ackA, adhE, ldhA, mgsA and dadX. The recombinant E. coli strain produced 114 g/L (1280 mM) of L-alanine from 120 g/L of glucose in 48 h under oxygen limiting conditions [11]. Further, Jojima and coworkers, in 2010, genetically engineered C. glutamicum by inactivation of the genes associated with organic acids production and over-expression of the Lysinibacillus sphaericus alaD gene for enhancing sugar metabolism under oxygen deprivation conditions. The resulting strain produced only 98 g/L (1097 mM) of L-alanine using fed-batch fermentation after 32 h, probably due to the retarded glucose consumption [15]. Later, in 2012, researchers of the same group reported the highest production of L-alanine by stepwise over-expression and chromosomal integration of four glycolytic genes (gapA, pyk, pfk and gpi) in C. glutamicum having heterologously expressed the alaD gene of L. sphaericus. Over-expression of glycolytic genes reduced the intracellular NADH/NAD+ ratio, which eventually led to an improvement in the glucose consumption, thus hastening the overall alanine productivity under oxygen deprivation conditions. The metabolically engineered strain thus produced 216 g/L (2430 mM) of L-alanine in 48 h using fed-batch fermentation, which was 6.4-fold higher than the wild type strain [16]. Further, using a thermo-regulated genetic switch, a high-level L-alanine production was achieved in the E. coli derivative expressing G. stearothermophillus alaD gene. The resulting strain produced L-alanine titers of 120.8 g/L (1347 mM) in 24 h under oxygen limiting conditions at 42 °C [17]. However, two-phase fermentation systems and heat transfer complications have limited the use of recombinant strain for industrial level production of L-alanine. Thus, to conclude, the complex genetic manipulations, codon biasing, fastidious nutritional requirements, translational competition between sister pathway enzymes leading to undesirable side reactions and co-product formation, heat generation, end product inhibition and requirements for the two-stage fermentation process and chiral separation have limited their utilization for industrial level production of L-alanine. Therefore, in the present study, P. acidilactici BD16, a microaerophilic strain, was chosen as a heterologous host for the production of L-alanine under anoxic conditions. Oxygen deprived conditions were found to be favorable for the high L-alanine titers observed in various recombinant strains [11,15,16,17]. Further, the use of the synthetic alaD gene with Pediococcus acidilactici optimized codons and a moderately high copy number shuttle vector pLES003alaD with cloned auto-inducible P289 promoter led to the constitutive expression of the AlaDH enzyme in the recombinant host, thus yielding a very high L-alanine production titer. The study provides a simple, one-stage fed-batch fermentation process for efficient L-alanine production in the heterologous host without hampering its natural metabolism and cell viability. The novelty of the study is the use of a synthetic systems biology-mediated metabolic engineering strategy that abolished the need of complex gene knock-outs for engineering a microbial strain, which may hinder maximal expression of the desired cloned gene. The robust expression system, ideal GRAS host, simple media formulation and a superlative fermentation yield in the fed-batch process validate the significance of the present study. However, in the future, the authors would like to work either on the segregation stability of the recombinant plasmid or on the use of gene integration approaches for achieving very high fermentation titers of L-alanine in the recombinant P. acidilactici BD16. Statistical optimizations and scale-up studies at the fermenter level could also be conducted before proposing a commercial scale L-alanine biosynthetic process. Potential applications of the recombinant P. acidilactici BD16 (alaD+) strain for the insitu L-alanine production in various foods, beverages and pharmaceuticals could also be explored further.