Discussion To treat the infections caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria especially the Gram-negative multi-drug resistant pathogens, new antibiotics are urgently needed. Among the platforms of antibiotic discovery, screening of soil-dwelling microorganisms, popularly known as Waksman platform was once most effective, however, due to the problem of the frequent rediscovery of known compounds, it has now collapsed [3]. The relatively new platforms such as the target-based screening of the large libraries of synthetic compounds also failed, partly due to low penetration of the synthetic compounds into the bacterial cell. This problem can be overcome by using the resistance-guided isolation of antibiotic producers as in this approach small number of strains need to be screened and multiple environments can be sampled [5]. The principle of the resistance-guided isolation method that led to the discovery of pekiskomycin was that the APB possess self-defense against their own product. When the Streptomyces isolation agar (SIA) or humic acid vitamin agar is supplemented with an antibiotic, the antibiotic-resistant strains that grow on agar media is likely the producer of antibiotics with similar scaffolds [4, 5]. Here in this study, we performed a resistance-guided screening of antibiotic-producing bacteria present in the river-bed sediments of Padma and Kapotakkho rivers of Bangladesh. Although several studies have been carried out previously to isolate the actinomycetes capable of producing bioactive compounds from soils and marine sediments from Bangladesh [18–20], no studies have been performed using the river bed sediments. We observed that supplementation of starch-casein-nitrate agar (SCNA) selective media with either azithromycin (a semisynthetic macrolide antibiotic) or meropenem (a semisynthetic carbapenem) decreased the number of contaminating bacteria on the agar plates and thus, the total number of colonies appeared on the plates decreased significantly compared to the control plates where no antibiotics were supplemented. We have also seen that, when the concentration of the antibiotic is increased in the isolation media, there is a proportionate decrease of the colony counts on the plates. So, some of the actinomycetes strains that appear on a lower concentration did not appear on a higher concentration of antibiotics. At very high concentrations, in some cases, no actinomycetes like colonies appeared, and only some fungal colonies grew. The previous studies on supplementation of antibiotics for selection also produced similar results. For instance, when rifampicin was supplemented to the SCNA media to isolate actinomycetes from marine sediments, the number of CFU decreased with an increase in the concentration of rifampicin on the plates [11]. Similarly, when vancomycin was supplemented to the isolation media, about 96% of the actinomycete strains that do not produce glycopeptide antibiotic (GPA), did not grow on the plates which allowed exclusive growth of resistant isolates that produce GPA. It also provided the opportunity to grow the slow-growing strains as well as the less-abundant actinomycetes [4]. Using the resistance-based isolation approach we found that 100% (3 out of 3) of the azithromycin resistant isolates exhibited antibacterial activities. Two of them (NAr5 and NAr6) exhibited broad-spectrum activity and one (NAr4) was active against the gram-negative bacteria only. However, in the case of meropenem-resistant actinomycete isolates, approximately 56% (5 out of 9) of the isolates exhibited antibacterial activity during the initial screening. The percentage of actinomycete isolates that exhibit antibacterial activity towards at least one type of bacteria (Gram-positive or Gram-negative) varies depending on the source. In a previous study conducted in our labs using the traditional Waksman approach, we found that about 54% of the actinomycetes obtained from various kinds of surface soils produced antibacterial compounds [18]. In another study of screening for actinomycetes producing antibacterial compounds using the soils of Sundarban, Bangladesh, about 36% of the actinomycete isolate were active against the indicator bacteria [20]. In another study using the different kinds of samples (water and sediment) from both marine and freshwater sources, 23% of the isolates (27 out of 119) exhibited antibacterial activity [21]. During a screen of the soil samples of the West of Iran, the percentage of active isolates was only 13.30% [22]. Thus, compared to these previous studies, screening of the antibiotic-producing actinomycetes using meropenem as a screening filter offered an increased output. Azithromycin is a semisynthetic broad-spectrum antibiotic of 15-membered-ring macrolide that works by inhibiting the protein synthesis of bacteria. Similar to erythromycin, it binds with the 50S large ribosomal subunit and inhibits the growth of the nascent polypeptide chain [23]. The mechanisms of resistance to azithromycin as well as other macrolides in the clinical pathogens include: i) target modifications by rRNA methylases or by mutations, ii) inactivation by esterases or by phosphotransferase and iii) macrolide-efflux pumps [24–26]. In the antibiotic-producing soil bacteria, the mechanisms of macrolide resistance include ribosomal modification [27], efflux-pump [28] and inactivation by glycosyltransferase-mediated glycosylation [29]. The mechanism of resistance by glycosylation has only been found in APB as a self-resistance mechanism and has not been reported in the clinical pathogens. For instance, oleandomycin producing Streptomyces antibioticus confers self-resistance by 2’-glucosylation of the antibiotic [29]. Macrolide resistance in Streptomyces lividans also occurs due to glycosylation [30]. Considering these examples of macrolide resistance mechanisms in both clinical pathogens and the antibiotic producing soil bacteria, it can be suggested that azithromycin-resistant isolates of our study used the target modification or the efflux pumps as their resistance mechanisms. Meropenem is a member of carbapenems which possess broad-spectrum antibacterial activity, having a distinctive structure of a carbapenem coupled to a β-lactam ring which exhibits defence against a range of β lactamases such as Metallo-β-lactamase (MBL) as well as extended-spectrum β-lactamases [31]. Meropenem possesses a common beta-lactam ring-like other β-lactam antibiotics, and act similarly by binding to and inactivating the penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), which are responsible for the development of the bacterial cell wall [32]. The most common mechanisms of meropenem resistance, as well as other carbapenems in the clinical pathogens, include: (i) enzymatic inactivation by β-lactam-hydrolyzing enzymes, (ii) target site mutation (mutation-derived from changes of their PBPs), and (iii) overexpression of efflux pumps [33]. Antibiotic producing soil bacteria develop resistance to meropenem as well as other carbapenems through (i) producing carbapenem-hydrolyzing enzymes (carbapenemases) (ii) decreasing outer membrane permeability, and (iii) increasing efflux mechanism [34]. The analysis of 16S rDNA sequences of NAr5 and NAr6 revealed that both belong to the genus Streptomyces. The cultural, physiological, and morphological characteristics of the isolates also matched with the genus Streptomyces. In the phylogenetic tree constructed with the 16S rDNA sequences, the NAr5 appeared on the same branch with S. tunisiensis CN-207 (Fig. 5). The S. tunisiensis CN-207 was isolated from Tunisian soils and was found to exhibit strong antibacterial activities against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria [35], however, the compound(s) responsible for the antibacterial activity has not been identified. The isolate NAr6 appeared on a separate branch in the phylogenetic tree (Fig. 5). It exhibited the highest 16S rDNA sequence identity with S. zaomyceticus NBRC 13,348. A strain of S. zaomyceticus was isolated from soil and it exhibited activity against both methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA)[36]. Another strain of S. zaomyceticus produces an antibiotic zaomycin [37]. Zaomycin is an antibiotic related to amphomycin, a lipopeptide antibiotic produced by different species of Streptomyces and Actinoplanes [38]. Further works are being carried out in our laboratory to identify the compounds that are produced by NAr5 and NAr6. This study has further provided evidence that the river sediments are a very potential source of APB and more investigations may lead to the isolation of novel APB and potentially new antibiotics having activity against clinically important pathogens. We have also confirmed the advantage of using a self-resistance mechanism to identify the antibiotic producers by eliminating the contaminating bacteria present in the samples, thus facilitates the growth of difficult to grow actinomycetes on the isolation plates. The isolates resistant to respective antibiotics used for selection have the potential to produce antibacterial compounds of a similar scaffold.