Discussion Although edeines were identified over 60 years ago, the biosynthetic pathway of edeines has remained ambiguous, thus limiting improvements of edeines yield through biosynthetic pathway modification. Westman et al. first identified the ede BGC in the B. brevis Vm4 genome based on genomic analyses (Westman et al., 2013). In this study, we confirmed the functionality of the ede BGC in B. brevis X23 through gene disruption. Identification and confirmation of the ede BGC allowed us to significantly improve the production of edeines through promoter engineering. We replaced the original promoter of the ede BGC with stronger constitutive promoters to increase expression of the ede BGC and improve edeine production. Transcriptomic analyses (data not shown) and the RT‐PCR assay (Fig. 6) indicated that the original promoter of ede BGC might be controlled by global secondary metabolic regulatory factors, and high‐level expression of ede BGC was not reached until the mid‐late stage (24 h). The three constitutive stronger promoters tested in this study, P43, Pmwp and Pshuttle‐09, mediate expression of genes that encode enzymes involved in primary metabolism and cell growth, which are active most of the time and are not controlled by secondary metabolic regulators (Ye et al., 1999; Mizukami et al., 2010). Therefore, the stronger constitutive promoters significantly increased the expression of ede BGC and the antimicrobial activity (edeine production) from the early growth stage. Three chemically inducible promoters, including PxylA, Pspc and Pgrac, were also tested in this study. Specific stimuli (xylose for PxylA; IPTG for Pspc and Pgrac) are required to switch on these chemically inducible promoters (Yansura and Henner, 1984; Kim et al., 1996; Phan et al., 2006), which increases the cost of fermentation. Chemically inducible promoters are usually companied by a regulatory gene encoding a repressor protein that binds to the promoter upstream, blocking the transcription of downstream genes in the absence of inducers. Therefore, chemically inducible promoters may achieve constitutive expression when the repressor gene is disrupted. Tran et al. constructed an inducer‐free expression plasmid with the IPTG‐inducible promoter Pgrac for B. subtilis by disrupting the repressor lacI gene (Tran et al., 2017). We constructed a reporter gene plasmid system in B. brevis X23‐WT based on the green fluorescent protein (gfp) gene to explore whether the PxylA, Pspc and Pgrac promoters could be transformed into inducer‐free promoters in B. brevis. The results showed that the promoters without repressor genes resulted in constitutive expression of the gfp gene in the absence of their inducers (Fig. S8). Subsequently, RT‐PCR also revealed constitutive expression of the ede BGC in B. brevis promoter‐engineered strains containing the PxylA, Pspc or Pgrac promoter throughout the growth period (Fig. 6). Of the six promoters, the Pmwp promoter resulted in the most significant expression of the ede BGC and the highest edeine production. This impressive power of the Pmwp promoter in driving the expression of ede BGC might be explained as follows. First, the promoter of the cell wall protein gene (HWP) in B. brevis HPD31 has long been regarded as an extremely strong promoter in the exponential period, and it is used in the Brevibacillus Expression System by TaKaRa Biomedical Technology Co., Ltd (Mizukami et al., 2010). This expression system has been widely applied for the robust expression of a large number of genes encoding enzymes, antigens and cytokines, such as α‐amylase, sphingomyelinase, xylanase, surface antigen, epidermal growth factor and interferon‐γ (Mizukami et al., 2010). The Pmwp promoter was derived from a middle cell wall protein (MWP) gene, which is the homolog of HWP (78% identity in B. brevis X23) (Ebisu et al., 1990). Second, based on transcriptomic analyses of B. brevis X23 in the exponential growth period, the MWP gene exhibited the highest transcription among all 6291 coding genes. The expression level of the MWP gene was 18.6 ± 0.8‐fold higher than that of the ede BGC (data not shown), suggesting that the MWP promoter is a strong promoter with the potential to improve edeine production in B. brevis. Indeed, the Pmwp promoter increased transcription of edeP in B. brevis X23 15.4 ± 1.9‐fold after 12 h of incubation, which was consistent with our previous abovementioned observation. Taken together, replacing the original promoter with stronger promoters is an efficient way to improve the production of natural products in bacteria. Interestingly, the yield of edeine B was not significantly increased or even decreased after replacing the original promoter with stronger promoters. Previously, Shimotohno et al. identified and purified edeine B1 amidinohydrolase, which can transform edeine B to edeine A. They speculated that edeine B was the intermediate product of edeine A (Shimotohno et al., 1999). This speculation could explain the markedly reduced production of edeine B compared with edeine A or even its decrease following promoter engineering. In addition, edeine B contains an uncommon guanyl‐spermidine substituted by spermidine. Thus, we speculated that low contents of the guanyl‐spermidine might limit edeine B production. A number of strategies from previous studies, such as optimization of the culture media, overexpression of the precursor synthesis pathway and modification of regulatory factors (Zhang et al., 2016), can be applied to further improve the production of edeine A. In this study, we successfully improved edeine A production in B. brevis X23 by replacing the original ede BGC promoter with strong promoters. Of the six strong promoters, Pmwp generated the highest yield of edeines (83.6 mg l−1). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report to examine the improvement of edeine production through genetic modification of the ede BGC. Based on these results, we are further exploring the edeine biosynthetic pathway and novel derivatives through structural modifications.