Discussion The current study aimed at introducing a promoter exchange strain that allows for self-inducible surfactin synthesis when oxygen-limiting, or even depleting, conditions occur and anaerobic nitrate respiration initiates. To mimic different oxygen availabilities in shake flask cultivations, either the filling volume or the agitation rate can be varied. This method was already used in other studies investigating surfactin synthesis in B. subtilis (Fahim et al. 2012; Jokari et al. 2013; Rangarajan et al. 2015; Rocha et al. 2020). In the current study, different filling volumes were employed. Studies of Schiefelbein et al. (2013) and Heyman et al. (2019), investigating either the kLa value or oxygen transfer rate OTR, have demonstrated that higher filling volumes result in lower oxygen availability. Results from this study supported the hypothesis when nitrogen sources were analyzed at different Rv resulting in either aerobic growth on ammonium as preferred nitrogen source, or anaerobic growth by nitrate respiration. Experiments have demonstrated that B. subtilis MG14 with PsrfA::PnasD poses an interesting candidate for further bioreactor process developments targeting at self-inducible surfactin synthesis uncoupled from the native quorum-sensing system. In addition, this self-inducible system is advantageous compared to IPTG-induced promoters due to reduced production costs. Furthermore, foaming was also lowered, and time delayed in both shake flask and bioreactor cultivations. Interestingly, both strains MG12 (PsrfA::PnarG) and MG14 showed improved growth rates when no surfactin was produced in 10% Rv. At both 50% and 100% Rv, increased growth rates were obtained with decreasing surfactin titers. Hence, expression and presence of surfactin seems to result in reduced growth rates, which is in accordance with previous studies (Tsuge et al. 2001; Vahidinasab et al. 2020). Shake flask cultivations employing different Rv have been shown to be a suitable approach to investigate the activation of the promoters PnarG and PnasD. In the presented set-up, the reference strains MG1 and MG5 reached Miller units of up to 2000 for PnasD and 180 for PnarG, respectively. Hence, PnasD expressions were even slightly higher than reported by Hoffmann et al. (2020) when cultivating in anaerobic serum flasks. On the contrary, PnarG expression levels were reported to reach up to 440 MU (Hoffmann et al. 2020). Consequently, as PnarG is an exclusively anaerobically activated promoter, the combination of 100% Rv at 120 rpm probably did not result in full anaerobic induction. One possibility to further decrease the oxygen input would be to vary the agitation rate as performed by Fahim et al. (2012). However, cell agglutination already occurred at 120 rpm and is expected to appear even earlier at lower agitation rates. Hence, as nitrate was often observed as growth limiting factor, increasing the nitrate concentration to elongate the cultivation would not be possible under these circumstances. One option would be to perform further strain engineering and delete genes responsible for biofilm formation and thus for cell agglutination (Pedrido et al. 2013). Assuming microaerobic conditions at 100% Rv and 120 rpm, strain MG14 reached up to ~ 3-fold higher PnasD expression than PsrfA in the reference strain. On the contrary, the surfactin concentration was only 1.4-fold increased. Feedback mechanisms or nutrient limitations might result in this observed discrepancy, and further studies must investigate which optimizations have to be performed on a molecular level or in operational parameter to reach a 3-fold increase in surfactin titer to exploit the complete potential of PnasD. As reported by Hoffmann et al. (2020), high ammonium and glucose concentrations reduced expression of PnarG, but such a reductive effect was not observed for PnasD. Still, fine-tuning of the medium is important to find a good balance between sufficient ammonium for aerobically growing cells, and cells performing nitrate respiration, hence providing ammonium. Particularly, the effect of different nitrate concentrations on the expression of both PnarG and PnasD has not been examined so far. This is also of utmost importance when employing a self-regulated HNO3-feed as pH regulator. Indeed, the amount of HNO3 added was higher than nitrate consumption due to the production of various metabolites that alkalize the medium on top to the pH shift caused by nitrate respiration, resulting in a continuous increase in nitrate. In addition, the amount of HNO3 needed is three-times higher than for e.g. H3PO4 (monovalent vs. trivalent acid). This results in further limitations as the bioreactor capacity is exhausted earlier. With the current set-up it cannot be examined if both oxygen-depleted and nitrate-depleted conditions reach even higher YP/X values as reported by Davis et al. (1999). For this purpose, mathematical modeling of the bioprocess combining a metabolic model of the nitrogen metabolism, oxygen availability and consumption, along with mechanisms of genetic regulation can be used to provide further insights into this complex interplay. Using this toolset, investigation and evaluation of a dual-limitation fed-batch process becomes feasible, which is a very demanding task for process control, as both limitations need to be tightly regulated (Noll and Henkel 2020). With respect to bioreactor cultivations, the original intention was to perform so called switch-processes, with the first part aiming at biomass accumulation, and the second part resulting in surfactin production. However, a drastic decrease in biomass was observed when cells entered oxygen-limited or even depleted conditions too fast. It was recently reported that ~ 90% of cells died upon oxygen depletion, while the remaining cells maintain their viability (Arjes et al. 2020). Similar observations were made in the current employed processes with drop in CDW. Although cells restored their growth, the surfactin productivity of these cells was reduced. Consequently, when targeting at switch processes with different pO2-profiles, it is of utmost importance to relate oxygen availability to adaptation of cells to anaerobic conditions. For example, Hoffmann et al. (1995) reported on a lag-phase of 24 to 36 h when aerobically growing cells were transferred to anaerobic conditions. This would result in time-consuming processes and the increased growth rates observed in aerobic non-surfactin producing cells would probably not compensate for these adaptation times. In a further approach, a cultivation with a constant agitation rate of 300 rpm and aeration rate of 1.2 L/min was tested. This process set-up was identified as easily operable and issues due to foam formation were drastically reduced compared to conventional batch and fed-batch processes with varying agitation and aeration rates due to pO2 regulation. In addition, foaming occurred time-delayed in strain MG14 compared to the reference strain KM1016 which can be attributed in parts to the absence of surfactin during the first hours of cultivation. However, foam formation was yet present prior to the induction of surfactin production. In this sense, identification of other metabolites, such as proteins, in foam and deletion of corresponding genes might be a target in future works to further reduce the foam formation. Results of both surfactin titer and promoter activity of PnasD also clearly indicated that the employed set-up more likely correlated to shake flask cultivations with 50% Rv. Also based on the Miller units obtained, it can be assumed that most cells still grew aerobically. This leads to the open question how many cells have already adapted to anaerobic conditions and it is crucial to further characterize the cell differentiation patterns in aerobically-anaerobically growing cells. Hence, further bioreactor cultivations must be performed with even lower aeration rates, either by applying air with a lower oxygen concentration (currently 16%), pure oxygen or, of course, by adjusting the technical equipment to allow for aeration rates below 1.2 L/min. Ideally, applying pure oxygen at much lower aeration rates (< 0.2 L/min) would result in two advantages. First, even less foam formation is expected to occur, and second, the autoinduction of surfactin synthesis is expected to be much higher as the available amount of oxygen per cell decreases faster. Another issue faced was the drastic accumulation of nitrite in bioreactor cultivations, which was not observed in shake flasks. At these concentrations, nitrite is reported to reduce and even inhibit cell growth (Hoffmann et al. 2020). Prior to further bioreactor process optimization, studies must address this limitation and investigate the defect of nitrite reduction to ammonium. Nevertheless, even under the current bioreactor process conditions, strain MG14 with a YP/X of 0.211 g/g and productivity q of 0.004 g/(g h) was already superior to other non-conventional bioreactor processes reported by Chtioui et al. (2012) (Rotating disc bioreactor, YP/X = 0.068 g/g, q = 0.001 g/(g h)) Coutte et al. (2010b) (Membrane bioreactor, YP/X = 0.078 g/g, q = 0.002 g/(g h)). A comparative table was prepared previously in Hoffmann et al. (2020). A foam-free anaerobic cultivation was reported to reach a promising YP/X with 0.278 g/g (Willenbacher et al. 2015), but as summarized by Hoffmann et al. (2020), complete anaerobic processes are time-consuming due to low growth rates and the overall surfactin titers are by far not competitive to conventional aerobic batch processes. With further appropriate regulation of the nitrogen sources and aeration, processes employing strain MG14 are expected to become superior to the reference strain JABs24 as demonstrated in shake flask cultivations with a YP/X of 1.007 g/g and productivity q of 0.023 g/(g h). Reaching these yields in bioreactor cultivations, strain MG14 will also surpass reported yields of an IPTG-inducible promoter with YP/X of 0.92 and q of 0.025 g/(g h) (calculated based on data given in Jiao et al. (2017)), being additionally advantageous due to the proposed cheap, foam-reduced and self-inducible system. To conclude, a self-inducible B. subtilis strain for surfactin synthesis induced upon oxygen-limitation has been developed. First, two interesting promoters, PnarG and PnasD that are involved in anaerobic nitrate respiration, were tested. PnarG has the advantage of being an exclusively anaerobically activated promoter, but surfactin titers and yields were shown to not be competitive to the reference strain B. subtilis JABs24. However, strain MG14 with PsrfA::PnasD surpassed the titer of strain JABs24 by 200 mg/L at low oxygen availability and reached an exceptionally high YP/X of 1.007 g/g. Strain B. subtilis MG14 poses an interesting candidate for further surfactin production process development. Additional process developments are crucial to elaborate the high potential of strain B. subtilis MG14 as self-inducible surfactin producer in reduced foaming or even foam-free environments.