Discussion Postharvest regulation of fruits and vegetables can result in an incredibly high value (Lemos Junior et al., 2020). Recent VOCs control research has produced positive results and is regarded as a useful alternative strategy for reducing fungal infection (Raza et al., 2016; Syed-Ab-Rahman et al., 2019). In this study, we isolated and characterized a strain of B. velezensis L1 that suppresses A. iridiaustralis growth in wolfberry during the postharvest process and displayed the broad-spectrum antifungal activity of VOCs obtained from B. velezensis L1. Therefore, B. velezensis L1 is anticipated to be employed as an antagonistic microbe. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first known study exhibiting the antagonistic activity of B. velezensis VOCs against A. iridiaustralis on postharvest wolfberry. In vitro antifungal experiments revealed that VOCs produced by B. velezensis L1 strongly inhibited the growth of A. iridiaustralis mycelium, spore germination, and sporulation. VOCs generated by B. velezensis C16 significantly suppress A. solani mycelium development and spore germination (Zhang et al., 2021). According to Jiang et al. (2018), VOCs from the B. velezensis strain may prevent sporulation of B. cinerea in peppers. This agrees with the findings obtained for B. velezensis L1. Additionally, the regrowth of A. iridiaustralis was reduced by the VOCs from B. velezensis L1. The effects of VOCs on B. cinerea were comparable to those of Pseudomonas fluorescens ZX (Zhong et al., 2021). This might be because VOCs disrupt the pathogenic fungi’s natural morphological structure and interfere with their normal proliferation. However, the damage appears to be lost with a reduction in VOC concentration, possibly because of the robust recovery and reproductive capacity of the fungi. According to SEM analysis, the VOCs from B. velezensis L1 can severely damage the morphology of A. iridiaustralis. Numerous studies have demonstrated that VOCs can harm pathogenic the walls and membrane systems of pathogenic fungi, impairing their ability to perform essential tasks (Zhao et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021b). This might be one of the key ways through which VOCs prevent harmful the growth of fungi. The effectiveness of VOCs in vivo was further investigated in light of the superior inhibitory capacity of B. velezensis L1 in vitro. The findings demonstrated that VOCs from B. velezensis L1 can greatly reduce disease severity in wolfberry. Although many descriptive studies have investigated the effectiveness of VOCs (Archana et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021a), more research is focused on the screening of strains and the identification of volatiles produced, with most authors not choosing to explore the relationship between their concentrations and diseases, which may be due to difficulties associated with testing. Calvo et al. (2020) reported that the B. velezensis strain inhibits mycelial growth and sporulation and is not pathogenic to humans after use. However, the VOCs concentration was not considered in their study. Myo et al. (2019) found that B. velezensis NKG-2 adversely affected the growth of six pathogenic fungi, but they too did not consider the VOCs concentration. The effect of VOC concentrations on the prevention, occurrence, and severity of diseases is of great value for the postharvest preservation of fruits and vegetables (Sharifi and Ryu, 2016). These concentrations were influenced by different numbers of LB plates. With an increase in concentration, the disease status of wolfberry fruits inoculated with the pathogenic fungus A. iridiaustralis changed significantly. Wang et al. (2021c) also confirmed that a certain concentration of VOCs produced by P. fluorescens ZX can significantly control gray mold in citrus and inhibit decay development. When VOCs reach a certain concentration, the growth of pathogenic fungi in fruits is completely inhibited, resulting in the best control effect. This suggests that it is entirely feasible to utilize VOCs produced by antagonistic microorganisms as potential BCAs. More importantly, VOCs also have an excellent control effect on fruits that rot naturally after harvest, inhibited all pathogenic fungi that caused the disease, which greatly prolongs the storage time of wolfberry. Studies have confirmed that VOCs produced by some bacteria, yeast and fungi can induce resistance against pathogens in fruits and vegetables (Zheng et al., 2019). This may be related to another antifungal mechanism of VOCs. Zhou et al. (2019) reported that the VOCs of strain CF-3 could reduce the enzymatic activity involved in fruit decomposition, activate the antioxidant enzymes to prevent cell damage, and elevate the disease-resistant enzyme activity to prevent the invasion of pathogenic fungi, thereby inducing resistance to fungi. Lee et al. (2019) showed that VOCs released by microorganisms induce self-resistance in the host to avoid the pathogen-induced harm. For the control of postharvest natural decay, strain L1 can be used as a new preservative with significant effect, which is of great value in commercial production. In general, antagonistic microorganisms can produce VOCs such as ketones, alcohols, aldehydes, esters, and acidic and aromatic compounds with antifungal activity, and different strains released VOCs are specific (Raza et al., 2015; Kai, 2020). In addition, VOCs can be altered by changes in culture conditions. For example, P. fluorescens ZX produced different VOCs when incubated on NB or NA (Wang et al., 2020). B. amyloliquefaciens PP19, Exiguobacterium acetylicum SI17, B. pumilus PI26 were reported to vary greatly in their VOCs with incubation time and between strains (L. Zheng et al., 2019). The FlavourSpec® Flavor Analyzer, which uses HS-GC-IMS technology, is mainly used for the research of food flavor (Wang et al., 2019; Yuan et al., 2019). Because of the high sensitivity and high resolution, the HS-GC-IMS technique is effective in identifying VOCs released by different strains. In this study, based on the complexity and diversity of VOCs, volatile gas chemicals emitted by B. velezensis L1 were identified using HS-GC-IMS, and 10 main components were found. The components identified varied from the volatile components discovered in other studies, which could be due to variations in the growth environment of the hostile bacteria (Wallace et al., 2017). On the other hand, the results obtained may vary because of the use of different types of equipment and materials in experiments to identify VOC components. Nine pure compounds were commercially available and selected for further analysis. Among the components identified, 2,3-butanedione had the strongest inhibitory effect on pathogenic fungi both in vitro and in vivo. 2,3-Butanedione could reduce the rot disease index of wolfberry fruit. Compared with the complex VOCs components, pure compounds have clear structural characteristics and are easy to produce and synthesize and may have practical applications in future. Calvo et al. (2020) showed that 20 μl/L of 2,3-butanedione could completely control gray mold in grapes and reduce blue rot in mandarins to 60%. Gergolet Diaz et al. (2021) showed that 2,3-butanedione had the strongest inhibitory effect on the mycelial growth of F. verticillioides. 2,3-Butanedione is a naturally occurring, safe and edible volatile alpha-diketone often used in food additives and flavors because of its good flavor. Pathogenic fungi are very sensitive to even very low concentrations of VOC, and therefore, this VOC is considered a promising compound for postharvest preservation (Zheng et al., 2020). 2-Pentanone, 2-heptanone, and acetoin are the most common and abundant VOCs in many strains (Wu et al., 2015; Lazazzara et al., 2021). As observed in our study, they have little impact on the hyphal development of pathogenic fungi. However, VOCs are usually complex in composition, and their inhibitory effects often do not depend on a single active ingredient (Wang et al., 2021c). Few studies have investigated the optimal application and activity of the combination of VOC. Thus, whether the main components in these VOCs are synergistically involved in the antifungal effect deserves further investigation. 1-Hydroxy-2-propanone, cyclohexanone, methyl 2-methylbutanoate, 2-pentylfuran and 2-methylpropyl butan were found to be produced by the B. velezensis strain for the first time. However, they showed no antifungal activity against A. iridiaustralis in the tests. This could be related to the concentration chosen, some antifungal compounds showed weak activity or were ineffective at low concentrations (Vicentini et al., 2007). However, it is worth considering that high concentrations of antifungal substances can harm the human body, which is not in line with our original intention. In addition, tests on pathogenic fungi that cause severe diseases in crops, fruits, vegetables and other foods have found that VOCs from B. velezensis L1 also significantly inhibit its growth. This provides more possibilities for the application of B. velezensis L1 and its VOCs as preservatives for controlling these diseases during storage. For different pathogenic fungi, the inhibitory effect of VOCs is also different. At present, the antifungal mechanisms discovered by VOCs mainly include inhibition of mycelial growth, damage to cell walls, regulation of enzyme activities, and induction of host resistance (Zhong et al., 2021). It is still important to explore the interactions and connections between VOCs, pathogenic fungi and hosts. This work is the first to investigate the inhibitory effect of B. velezensis L1 on postharvest disease of wolfberry. In experiments, B. velezensis L1 and its volatiles (2,3-butanedione) can effectively reduce the decay caused by pathogenic fungi and prolong storage time. These results provide favorable evidence for the biocontrol activity of strain L1 against A. iridiaustralis and other important fungal pathogens, and also provides insights to develop storage systems for fresh fruits and vegetables after harvest.