DISCUSSION Small alarmone hydrolases have been identified across domains of life and play multiple roles in metazoans in response to environmental stresses. However, the physiological roles of small alarmone hydrolases are poorly characterized in bacteria, except as antitoxins. In this study, we characterized an orphan small alarmone hydrolase in the plant-pathogenic bacterium X. campestris pv. campestris. We found that XccSAH hydrolyzed different alarmones and cofactors in vitro and played multiple roles in vivo. First, XccSAH contributed to hydrolysis of (pp)pGpp in X. campestris pv. campestris during amino acid starvation, demonstrating a biological role of SAH in alarmone turnover. Second, XccSAH improved survival against bacterial predators such as Pseudomonas species. Third, XccSAH hydrolyzed NADPH to release NADH in vitro and had a strong effect on cellular NADH levels in vivo. Together, our findings suggest that bacterial SAH can function as a “Swiss army knife” of alarmone and nucleotide regulation during growth or upon stresses. The substrate promiscuity we observed with XccSAH was intriguing. XccSAH is able to mediate nucleophilic attack of the phosphate 2′ or 3′ of ribose (3′ for alarmones and 2′ for NADPH), regardless of the length of the 5′ phosphates (mono-, bi-, or triphosphate) or the identity of the purine base (A or G). XccSAH belongs to the subgroup Mesh1-L (16), which is closely related to subgroup Mesh1, the metazoan SAH with promiscuity to remove the phosphate groups at 3′ for (p)ppGpp and 2′ for NADPH in the ribose ring (32), regardless of the identity of the purine base (A or G) (30). Other SAH homologs, such as Methylobacterium extorquens SAH (30), have been reported to display a more restricted substrate spectrum, hydrolyzing (p)ppApp but not (p)ppGpp. The different substrate spectrum in XccSAH could be associated with the distinct sequence features outside of the highly conserved catalytic residues essential for metal coordination and hydrolysis (Fig. 1B). First, XccSAH lacks a well-defined nicotinamide riboside (NR) interaction motif found in Mesh1. This could explain why XccSAH is as efficient against alarmones as Mesh1 (30), but its efficiency of NADPH hydrolysis is ~40 times less efficient than Mesh1 (32) (~3.63 × 102 s−1 M−1 versus ~14.4 × 103 s−1 M−1). Second, while XccSAH can hydrolyze the toxic alarmone pppApp, similar to Pseudomonas aeruginosa SAH (29) and M. extorquens SAH (30), it lacks the multiple prolines adjacent to the hydrolase domain (HD) motifs HD5 and -6 (Fig. 1B) proposed to increase substrate promiscuity (29). Interestingly, XccSAH uniquely contains a stretch of three glycines adjacent to the conserved hydrolase domain motifs HD3 and HD4 (Fig. 1B), which may also influence substrate specificity. Given the recent report that subtle structural variations between SAHs can lead to marked differences in hydrolysis properties (46), it is possible that XccSAH may have evolved unique features to achieve different degrees of substrate promiscuity and hydrolysis activities. Apart from an increased substrate spectrum, the biochemical properties of XccSAH toward different substrates also differed (Table 3). XccSAH had higher catalytic efficiency for the alarmones than for NADPH, likely due to the difference between 3′-phosphates in the alarmones versus 2′-phosphates in NADPH (32). For alarmones, XccSAH had higher affinity for (pp)pGpp than pppApp, while catalytic activity was the greatest for pppApp, followed by pppGpp, ppGpp, and pGpp (Table 3). This suggests that XccSAH prefers alarmone substrates with an adenine over guanine nucleobase in addition to a higher number of 5′-phosphates. Physiologically, the different affinities and catalytic activities to substrates could lead to competition for enzyme activity when multiple substrates are present in the cell. The high catalytic efficiency for pppApp by XccSAH likely prioritizes the enzyme toward hydrolysis against toxic (p)ppApp accumulation from interbacterial attack, since hydrolases such as SpoT have no activity against (p)ppApp. The moderate (pp)pGpp hydrolysis efficiency by XccSAH can enable the enzyme to assist (pp)pGpp turnover during stress when the cells have high (pp)pGpp. The lower efficiency of NAPDH hydrolysis suggests that NADPH/NADH regulation by XccSAH is more prominent when the levels of competing alarmone substrates are low and cofactor levels are high, such as during unstressed growth. Thus, XccSAH provides diverse regulation of alarmones and cofactors, according to their relative concentrations in the cell. In addition, gene expression control or interacting regulators may also be present to further modulate XccSAH level and activity. Our finding that XccSAH is an NADPH phosphatase suggests that NADPH hydrolysis is an evolutionarily conserved function of both bacterial and metazoan SAH and Mesh1. Based on our in vitro data, XccSAH has a Km of ~130 μM to NADPH. This is physiologically relevant to our estimated NADPH concentration of ~570 μM in X. campestris pv. campestris grown in amino acid-defined media (Table 4). In comparison, NADH concentration was ~87 μM (Table 4), which was similar to that in exponentially growing E. coli (47). The difference between cellular NADPH and NADH levels in X. campestris pv. campestris suggests that XccSAH can potentially release NADH from NADPH to facilitate growth under suboptimal nutrient conditions. This possibility is supported by our observation that the Δsah mutant had reduced NADH and growth, both of which were restored by reintroduction of the sah gene. Compared to metazoan Mesh1, which controls NADPH levels to regulate NADPH-driven pathways such as ferroptosis (32), XccSAH appears to play a role in NADH regeneration from the NADPH pool. Estimated NAD(H) and NADP(H) concentrations in X. campestris pv. campestris wild type and sah mutants grown in defined media supplemented with amino acidsa Metabolite Cellular concn in X. campestris pv. campestris strain (μM). WT Δsah Δsah::Psah. NAD+ 416.17 ± 31.03 673.72 ± 95.83 522.41 ± 75.88. NADP+ 350.68 ± 21.50 304.49 ± 73.35 312.69 ± 44.09. NADPH 577.31 ± 54.81 429.24 ± 74.85 428.51 ± 46.89. NADH 87.15 ± 24.35 4.61 ± 2.27 31.90 ± 15.60. Estimations are based on LC-MS data presented in Fig. 7. Each value represents the mean and standard error from three independent experiments. As a plant pathogen, X. campestris pv. campestris is exposed to both plant-associated and nonplant habitats (48) that can be subjected to diverse environmental changes, such as nutrient fluctuations and attack and competitions from other microorganisms. To facilitate adaptation, Xanthomonas employs multiple signaling systems to regulate stress responses (49), including the nucleotide second messenger c-di-GMP, which affects virulence and motility (50), and the nucleotide alarmone (p)ppGpp, produced by RelA and SpoT and which is required for virulence in X. campestris pv. campestris (41). In contrast, we were not able to detect an essential role of XccSAH in X. campestris pv. campestris pathogenesis; instead, we revealed that XccSAH contributes to interspecies competition, growth fitness, and NADH metabolism in X. campestris pv. campestris. Thus, it is possible that XccSAH functions as a tuner of stress response and metabolism with biological roles diversified from RelA and SpoT. Given the widespread presence of SAHs in bacteria, it is plausible that this differential role is conserved in other Xanthomonas species.