DISCUSSION Polaramycin B structure, function and concentration thresholds for changing fungal metabolism The molecular details of the interaction between microorganisms that compete for physical space and/or metabolic resources are still a relative sparsely investigated field of molecular microbiology despite its omnipresence in our biosphere. In previous work, it was suggested that a direct, physical contact between S. rapamycinicus and A. nidulans is necessary to trigger the genetic response of the fungus leading to the production of orsellinic acid (ORS) and its derivates (Schroeckh et al., 2009). Using a novel experimental system, we were now able to identify the chemical molecule that triggers the genetic response underlying the ORS production in these co‐cultures. We identified a 36 carbon‐membered polyol macrolide containing a hemiacetal monoester of malonic acid and a guanidyl group, collectively known as polaramycin B. This substance has previously been extracted from Streptomyces hygroscopicus LP‐93 but to the best of our knowledge not much research has been done on this particular variant of guanidine‐containing polyhydroxyl macrolide since its discovery in 1997 (Meng & Jin, 1997). Generally, these macrolides have been shown to possess broad‐spectrum antibacterial and antifungal activities (reviewed in Song et al., 2019). By comparison of different variants of these macrolides, the following assumptions about structure–function relationships could be made: The size of the lactone ring has minor influence on the antimicrobial activity (32 and 36 sized structures were compared), but the terminal guanidine group is crucial for their antibacterial and antifungal activities. The six‐membered hemiketal ring (C17–C21) plays an essential role in the antimicrobial activity, the malonyl group (C23) reduces the antimicrobial activity and reduction of double bond or methylation of the lactone ring does not have a strong influence on the antimicrobial activity (see Song et al., 2019 and references therein). Most likely, in many natural environments the concentration of polaramycin B will not reach or exceed the threshold concentration of 0.5 μg polaramycin B per ml of medium, as determined in the artificial laboratory growth condition. Therefore, in nature, direct interaction between bacterial and fungal cells will most likely still be required for effective chemical communication, simply because the triggering molecules freely diffuse. And this may also have been the reason why in high‐volume liquid shake co‐cultures the required concentration of polaramycin B was only reached when cells directly interacted. Also, the fungal cell density plays a role as higher cell densities dilute the number of polaramycin B molecules per fungal cell. We conclude this because in densely growing A. nidulans cultures incubated on high‐nutrient AMM culture plates (55 mM glucose, 10 mM nitrate) the YPs‐inducing effect by opposing S. rapamycinicus colonies was very hard to observe compared to the water‐agar medium lacking these nutrients. In the latter, YPs were easily detectable in the very fine and thin mycelial network that A. nidulans cells develop under these conditions. The metabolic response of fungal colonies to bacterial confrontation is unidirectional The water‐agar plate assays allowed us to observe the metabolic ‘warfare’ between the two microorganisms and we could observe that the fungal colony produces YPs and ORS only in the region that faces the bacterial colony, but not in the far side and in distant areas of this competition region. That indicates that the fungal cells respond individually to the presence of the bacterium and that this signal is not transferred very far through the mycelial network. So, a fungal colony only seems to represent a limited ‘information network’ that does not lead to a genetic alert of cells not directly connected to each other. Macroscopically, a fungal colony appears as an interwoven hyphal network, but the single cells within these hyphae may respond individually depending on the prevailing polaramycin B concentration. Apart from the observed production of YPs and other SMs, this spatially isolated response within the fungal colony was also observed for other phenotypic changes like growth inhibition and induction of sporulation that was not observed at the distant, far side of the competition zone. The conidiation phenotype was corroborated with data from our transcriptome analyses in which we observed highly transcribed sporulation‐related genes [e.g. AN3624 (ygA), AN4998(gapA), AN2513 (pipA), AN0928, AN7735 (eglD) and AN0863] after polaramycin B treatment. This observation indicates that a fungal colony, although representing a network of connected cells, does not represent an ‘information network’ in the sense that a signal arriving at one end of the colony is passed on to the other side of the same colony. Possible mode of action of polaramycin B Besides the dba1–dba2 cluster for ORS and YPK production, also other BGCs showed increased transcription levels in response to polaramycin B. These included aspercryptin and the terrequinone clusters, but due to the lack of metabolite standards, some low‐quality mass‐spectrometry data or very low metabolite concentrations, the clear‐cut correlation between transcriptional levels and metabolite concentrations cannot be made at the moment. On the other hand, not all A. nidulans BGCs seem to respond equally to polaramycin B treatment. For example, the penicillin cluster is repressed by this substance. This is interesting in light of the fact that Streptomycetes strains are known producers of penicillin and similar antibiotics. Therefore, these bacteria require a strong self‐resistance mechanism against these types of antibiotics and apparently, A. nidulans actively ceases production of an antibiotic that is obviously useless against this specific competitor (reviewed in Ogawara, 2016). Previously, it has been shown that a closely related molecule to polaramycin B, azalomycin F, acts on fungi via disturbance of the cell membrane, but not much work was committed into deciphering its mode of action. We applied transcriptomics to gain more insight and could identify genes related to lipid metabolism, membrane function and growth regulation as being downregulated during the treatment. Apparently, affected cells responded to this challenge by upregulation of possible compensatory genetic networks, such as genes necessary for membrane stability, translation and ribosomal functions as well as enzymes that counteract oxidative stress. This response overlaps with the 3‐AT treatment and is also similar to the response of the direct physical interaction between A. nidulans and S. rapamycinicus, (Fischer et al., 2018; Nützmann et al., 2011). 3‐AT exposure is known to block histidine biosynthesis eventually leading to an amino acid starvation and induction of the cross‐pathway control genes like cpcA and basR (Braus et al., 2006). Our groups also found chromatin mutants with changes in the ORS and YPs production. A chromatin‐related function of polaramycin B in activating BGCs? Chromatin structure is influenced by histone modifications and in fungi, transcriptional co‐regulation of the genes residing inside a certain BGC is facilitated by chromatin transitions (Pfannenstiel & Keller, 2019; Strauss & Reyes‐Dominguez, 2011). Interestingly, a mutant lacking a component of the COMPASS complex that is responsible for positioning histone H3K4 methylation marks (H3K4me2/3) was found to strongly overproduce ORS and YPKs and also featured strongly induced expression of the dba1–dba2 cluster (Bok et al., 2009). Consistently, the opposite type of mutant lacking the H3K4me3 de‐methylase gene KdmB showed lower expression of these BGCs (Bachleitner et al., 2019; Gacek‐Matthews et al., 2016). As H3K4me3 is a histone modification generally associated with activating functions, it seems counter‐intuitive that a mutant lacking this function would be more active in transcription of the ORS/dba cluster. However, it is known that cells lacking the H3K4 methyltransferase system have a defect in silencing loci positioned near telomeres (Margaritis et al., 2012; Nislow et al., 1997). Additionally, or alternatively, the lack of H3K4 methylation may downregulate a basic metabolic gene involved in amino acid biosynthesis thus leading to artificial amino acid starvation and subsequent induction of ORS/YPs production. The experimental proof of this hypothesis awaits further research.