4. Discussion Levofloxacin, along with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, is the main drug used in the treatment of S. maltophilia infection [9,10,11]. However, an increase in the number of resistant strains or strains with reduced susceptibility to this fluoroquinolone has been observed worldwide in the last two decades [9,12,13]. When considering the molecular basis of S. maltophilia clinical strains resistant to levofloxacin, the overproduction of RND efflux systems should be taken into account [15,18,26,27,35]. In this study, the contribution of efflux systems to levofloxacin resistance in 94 S. maltophilia clinical strains isolated in Warsaw was determined using phenotypic and molecular methods. Previously, the presence of genes encoding various ten efflux pumps from both RND and ABC families was shown in the majority of the 94 studied isolates [14]. To assess the role of efflux systems in antimicrobial resistance of S. maltophilia, three efflux pump inhibitors were used: CCCP, reserpine, and PAβN [42,43,44,45,46]. Among the 13 isolates for which a significant reduction in the MIC value of levofloxacin was demonstrated in the presence of EPIs, the majority of the isolates gave a positive result after the addition of CCCP. In the case of three isolates, the increase in susceptibility to this fluoroquinolone was obtained only after the addition of PAβN. It is known that CCCP inhibits the activity of all proton pumps in Gram-negative rods, including S. maltophilia. CCCP, as one of the protonophores, reduces ATP production and increases membrane permeability in bacteria by interfering with the transmembrane electrochemical gradient and proton motive force [47]. Unlike CCCP, other inhibitors used, such as PAβN and reserpine, have a narrower spectrum of activity. PAβN is an inhibitor of RND efflux pumps [43,45]. Reserpine is an indole alkaloid due to low specificity and affinity of reserpine-membrane glycoprotein binding. A high dose is required to inhibit some efflux pumps [44]. It should be emphasized that the activity of MDR efflux systems could be decreased by EPIs, but the relationship between the antibiotic MIC reduction in the presence of EPIs and efflux system overexpression is not always provided [42,43,44,45]. In addition, it has recently been shown that the simultaneous overexpression of the two efflux systems does not necessarily increase the resistance level to levofloxacin but results in the resistance to the extended spectrum of substrates of these systems [35]. Taking into account the above statements, the widespread occurrence of MDR efflux pumps in the tested isolates, up to 100%, and the possibility of overproduction of more than one efflux system in one isolate, we investigated the effect of CCCP, as a universal EPI, on the susceptibility of S. maltophilia to a wide spectrum of antibiotics. Only 5 out of 13 isolates (with the 4-fold reduction in levofloxacin MIC) showed an increased susceptibility to both levofloxacin and other antibiotics such as gentamicin, polymyxin B, or chloramphenicol in the presence of EPIs. On the other hand, for the majority of the isolates showing a significant reduction in the gentamicin MIC values in the presence of CCCP, such decreases were not obtained by testing other antibiotics, including levofloxacin. The investigation of the role of MDR efflux pumps in resistance to antimicrobial agents is usually conducted by analyzing the expression levels of the efflux pump genes and studying regulatory genes [18,30,36]. In our study, five out of six investigated isolates overexpressed the smeDEF efflux system operon, but there was no correlation between the overexpression level, the resistance to levofloxacin, and the reduction of the MIC value of levofloxacin in the presence of EPIs. CCCP was the most effective EPI, which significantly reduced the levofloxacin MIC in each isolate with the overexpression of the smeD gene. It has been described that overexpression of the smeDEF operon is associated with mutations in its local regulatory gene, smeT [30,48]. The nucleotide mutation, which led to the amino acid change Arg123Lys, present in isolate no. 35/2011 in comparison to 67/2013, was previously described by Sanchez in urinary and sputum S. maltophilia isolates (C357 and E923, respectively) with an overproducing SmeDEF efflux system [48]. The second change in the amino acid sequence of SmeT found in isolate 35/2011 compared to isolate 67/2013 was Asp204Glu, while a similar change, Ala204Glu, was previously described in the smeDEF-overexpressed clinical isolate no. C357 [48]. Thus, it appears that the presence of Lys at position 123 and Glu at position 204 of the regulator protein contributes to the overexpression of the smeDEF operon. The third revealed amino acid change in SmeT of isolate no. 35/2011, in comparison to isolate no. 67/2013, was Asp182Glu. However, this change is not significant for the susceptibility profile of the strain. The presence of both Asp and Glu at position 182, previously observed in various isolates, was not associated with overexpression of the smeDEF operon [48]. An identical smeT nucleotide sequence, as present in 35/2011, was deposited in the GenBank NCBI database (accession no. CP067993.1). On the other hand, the same smeT gene sequence was demonstrated for the reference levofloxacin-sensitive isolate no. 67/2013 as well as for the levofloxacin-resistant smeD-overexpression clinical isolates. Therefore, the expression of the pump efflux operons in S. maltophilia is controlled not only by local regulators but also by global regulators. In other non-fermentative Gram-negative bacterium such as Psudomonas aeruginosa, the global regulator, SoxR, which affects the expression of genes encoding Mex efflux systems, has been described [49]. Moreover, in S. maltophilia strains, the presence of two-component regulatory systems and their influence on the expression of efflux pump operons was demonstrated. SmeSR involved in smeABC expression and the second TCS, SmeSyRy, regulated the smeYZ operon [26]. Recently, Wu et al. proved that inactivation of smeRySy not only decreased the expression of smeYZ but also increased the expression of the smeDEF operon [50]. Additionally, the obtained results of the expression levels of the smeDEF operons did not correlate with the susceptibility of the tested S. maltophilia isolates to levofloxacin. The levofloxacin-susceptible isolate no. 15/2010 showed the highest level of the smeD gene expression. On the other hand, the levofloxacin-resistant isolate no. 31/2011 exhibited the lowest level of this gene expression. Our results seem to confirm the observations of Wu et al. [35]. They indicated that simply assessing the overexpression of smeDEF operon by RT-qPCR did not significantly contribute to fluoroquinolone’s resistance. Moreover, for several investigated strains, deletion of smeDEF operons had no impact on their susceptibility. The second best-known efflux pump that contributes to the acquired fluoroquinolones-resistance of S. maltophilia strains is SmeVWX [18,36]. The overexpression of the smeV gene has been demonstrated by us in one isolate, no. 41/2011. Furthermore, this isolate was the most resistant to levofloxacin from the studied collection, and the 4-fold reduction in levofloxacin MIC in the presence of PAβN was shown. Recently, it was described that overexpression of the smeVWX operon is associated with mutations in the smeRv gene encoding the local regulator [27,30,36]. The change of SmeRv amino acid sequence in position 266, Gly266Ser, present in isolate no. 41/2011, has been previously described in several clinical strains isolated in Spain and in mutants obtained in vitro with the overproduction of the SmeVWX efflux system [27,30,36]. Moreover, the following changes in the amino acid sequence of the SmeRv regulator in smeVWX-overexpressing strains have been shown so far: Gly46Asp, Thr222Pro, Glu256Asp, Ala265Thr, Gly266Asp, Gly266Cys, and Cys310Phe. [27,30,36]. It should be emphasized that mutations leading to an amino acid change at position 266 of the regulatory protein were the most often detected mutation. They are extremely important for smeVWX overexpression, which contributes to drug resistance of such a strain. The strain PUC101, isolated in Spain (GenBank accession No. WP_180835982.1) with the same SmeRv amino acid sequence as Polish isolate no. 41/2011, was characterized by resistance to levofloxacin, colistin, ceftazidime, and ticarcillin-clavulanate, but there was no information concerning expression of the efflux system operon in PUC101 [51]. Besides that, only isolate no. 41/2011 showed a significant reduction in trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole MIC in the presence of CCCP. This indicated that SmeVWX may also play an important role in resistance to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, which is a known substrate of this efflux system. As previously demonstrated, MDR efflux pumps are commonly found in clinical isolates [14]. Importantly, levofloxacin is a known substrate for 5 out of the 8 RND efflux systems. It is possible that the use of fluoroquinolones in monotherapy may lead to mutations in local and global regulatory genes. As a consequence, there are amino acid changes in the regulatory proteins, which causes the overexpression of the efflux system operons and the resistance of the strains.