4 Discussion Medicinal plants have long been used as a source of medicine. Approximately 8,000 medicinal plants have been developed into drugs and biocides, contributing more than 7,000 compounds to the pharmaceutical industry (Kaul et al., 2012). However, the overuse of medicinal plants in traditional folk medicine practices has led to environmental degradation and loss of biodiversity. Developing bioactive compounds based on endophytic fungi can reduce deforestation and the extinction of important and valuable medicinal plants (Uzma et al., 2019). Medicinal plants are a valuable source for exploring biologically active endophytes (Kaul et al., 2012). In this study, R. roxburghii is an economically important source of medicine and food. Its fruit is rich in vitamin C (up to 2 000 mg/100 g), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and flavonoids (Xu et al., 2019; Hou et al., 2020). The root, leaf, and fruit of R. roxburghii have been used as traditional medicinal materials to treat several diseases, such as dyspepsia, enteritis, and scurvy. In addition, some components extracted from R. roxburghii have been demonstrated to possess biological activities, including hypoglycemic, hypolipidemic, immune-enhancing, and antitumor effects (Zhang et al., 2021b). More importantly, R. roxburghii is also a plant source of antimicrobial compounds (Ma et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021). Therefore, we selected R. roxburghii as a candidate for screening endophytic fungi with antimicrobial activity. Species-level identification of fungi is a critical step to ensure reproducibility and is essential for both basic scientific research (ecology, taxonomy) and applied scientific research (genomics, bioprospecting). However, only 14% of fungal secondary metabolites studies have combined morphological and molecular data for identification (Raja et al., 2017). The results of these investigations suggest that the identification of fungi in most such studies is unreliable, as a single gene (mainly ITS) may fail to distinguish closely related members of certain genera phylogenetically. More than a quarter of GenBank fungal ITS sequences have not been adequately confirmed taxonomically (Zhang et al., 2021b). For accurate species identification, molecular data (preferably polygenic) should be combined with morphological studies (Woudenberg et al., 2017). In this study, we obtained the antimicrobial active strain Ep. latusicollum HGUP191049, whose taxonomic status was confirmed by morphology and multigene phylogenetic analyses. In this study, the strains isolated from R. roxburghii with antimicrobial activity were screened out by multigene phylogenetic analyses (ITS, LSU, RPB2, TUB, TEF, and ACT), the plate confrontation method, and the disc diffusion method, namely Ep. latusicollum HGUP191049, Neofusicoccum sp. HGUP191080, and Se. terrestris HGUP190028. Epicoccum latusicollum has been reported to be capable of causing several plant diseases, including leaf spots on tobacco and Elaeagnus pungens (Guo et al., 2021; Qi et al., 2021), stalk rot on maize (Zea mays L.) (Xu et al., 2022), and root rot on Nicotiana tabacum (Gai et al., 2020). In this work, this species is first reported as an endophytic fungus with antimicrobial activity and is a new host record from R. roxburghii. Another strain with antimicrobial activity, Neofusicoccum sp. HGUP191080 may phylogenetically represent a new species and requires further identification by morphology. Neofusicoccum species, which are endophytes or pathogens of plants, produce structurally different metabolites that show interesting biological activities such as antibacterial, cytotoxic, and phytotoxic (Salvatore et al., 2021). Finally, Se. terrestris caused pink root rot in various plants, such as squash, canola, and winter squash (Ikeda et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2017; Rivedal et al., 2018). However, as an endophyte isolated from Dysoxylum binectariferum, Se. terrestris is known to produce blennolides with anticancer and antimicrobial activity (Arora et al., 2018). Thus, some species commonly reported as pathogens may have potential biological activity as endophytic fungi. Further MIC assays demonstrated that the present study’s antimicrobial strength and spectrum of Ep. latusicollum HGUP191049 were superior to other strains. The development of genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, high-throughput technologies, and computational resources has significantly broadened the understanding of the key pathways affecting the synthesis of fungal secondary metabolites (Palazzotto and Weber, 2018). In this study, genomics, non-target metabolomics, and comparative genomics were performed further to investigate the biosynthetic capacity of Ep. latusicollum HGUP191049. Genes required for secondary metabolite synthesis are typically arranged in a multigene biosynthetic gene cluster (Yang et al., 2019). With this high-quality genome sequence and annotation, we predicted a total of 24 BGCs, which may encode eight known compounds. Of these compounds, squalestatin S1, oxyjavanicin, and patulin were reported to have antimicrobial activity (Nicolaou et al., 1994; Paytubi et al., 2017; Kato et al., 2020). Genetic modification of BGCs and/or introduction of a particular mutation provides opportunities to obtain derivatives of the original metabolites (Ichikawa et al., 2012). Genome mining of gene clusters encoding biosynthetic pathways of fungal secondary metabolites has become a critical approach for new compound discovery (Weber et al., 2015). The sequencing and annotation of the Ep. latusicollum HGUP191049 genome is the foundation for the identification of antimicrobial compound BGCs, the activation of silencing gene clusters, and the identification and regulation of biosynthetic pathways. In this study, non-targeted metabolic analyses further revealed the biosynthetic capacity and potential antimicrobial compounds of Ep. latusicollum HGUP191049 by determining all detectable metabolites. Moreover, patulin, a compound encoded by gene cluster 16, has also been detected. Comparative genomics aims to use an ensemble of related genomes to improve the understanding of each genome in the set (Haubold & Wiehe, 2004). Epicoccum is a genus in which endophytic, saprophytic, and pathogenic modes of nutrition coexist, such as Ep. nigrum is a primary saprophyte involved in the retting of flax (Brown, 1984), an endophytic fungus isolated from the leaves of Lysidice rhodostegia (Wang et al., 2010), even a pathogen that causes leaf spot disease on Lablab purpureus (Mahadevakumar et al., 2014). So, Epicoccum species may reshape their lifestyles among endophytic, saprophytic, and pathogenic to adapt to changing environmental conditions (Kuo et al., 2014). The fungus may secrete numerous proteins that facilitate colonization during interaction with the plant (Yin et al., 2015). Nine high-level phenotypic terms are defined in PHI-base to compare the pathogen-host interactions between organisms across the tree of life (Urban et al., 2017). Using comparative genomic approaches, we show that PHI:5494, one of the “increased pathogenicity (hypervirulence)” type genes, may be an important factor in the difference in pathogenicity between Epicoccum species. Moreover, endophytic HGUP191049 had six “loss of pathogenicity” phenotypic genes different from the pathogenic T41, which may account for the lifestyle differences in Ep. latusicollum. Currently, CAZyme gene families are defined and classified into six main categories in the CAZy database: glycosyltransferases (GTs), glycoside hydrolases (GHs), polysaccharide lyases (PLs), carbohydrate esterases (CEs), carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs), and enzymes of auxiliary activities (AAs) (Zhang et al., 2018). Of these families, GH18 is related to a family of chitin degradation in amounts ranging from 9 to 15 by comparative analyses, which may be an important factor contributing to the differences in the antifungal potential of Epicoccum spp. The secondary metabolites of fungi constitute a rich source of natural products with antimicrobial activity. Genes encoding biosynthetic pathways of secondary metabolites are usually located on chromosomes forming BGCs (Yao et al., 2021). Results from comparative analyses show that Epicoccum is a promising source of terpenes. Terpenes exhibit antimicrobial activity owing to their highly lipophilic nature, which may interfere with the integrity and function of cell membranes (Sohrabi et al., 2015). In addition, oxyjavanicin and squalestatin S1 reported as antimicrobial agents (Nicolaou et al., 1994; Kato et al., 2020), are putative secondary metabolites shared by Epicoccum spp. In this study, a broad-spectrum antimicrobial potential strain was screened out from the endophytic fungi of R. roxburghii and analyzed for biosynthetic capacity.