Discussion The relentless rise in herbicide-resistant weeds already poses a significant threat to global food security and as such, new herbicides with new modes of action are desperately needed. Moreover, as consumer attitudes shift, natural product ‘bioherbicides’ will rise in their appeal and currently in the USA enjoy an accelerated regulatory journey59. Herein, we have validated HMGR as a potential herbicide target. Using the HMGR crystal structure from a model plant we have demonstrated that, despite its overall sequence and structure conservation with HsHMGCR, differences in the architecture (especially the active site) can be exploited to develop plant-specific synthetic HMGR inhibitors. The progress herein provides a basis for the discovery of natural product statins that might be suitable bioherbicides. The differences in the architecture of AtHMG1 that allowed for species selectivity largely arise from an unusual orientation of the Lβ2-Lα1 loop that is likely the result of increased flexibility in the neighbouring Nα4-Lβ1 loop. The atypical orientation of the Lβ2-Lα1 loop in AtHMG1 disrupts the hydrogen bonding network formed between the catalytic residues Glu265/Lys397/Asn461/Asp473 (HsHMGCR Glu559/Lys691/Asn755/Asp767), thereby retaining only those hydrogen bonds that stabilise the catalytic Lys via the adjacent Asn and Asp residues. The conserved location of the catalytic Lys between AtHMG1 and other class I and II HMGRs strongly suggests this residue is responsible for polarising the carbonyl oxygen of HMG-CoA substrate and mevaldehyde intermediate, and for performing the final protonation step. Glu265 is not in a favourable position to hydrogen bond to either the substrate thioester oxygen or the adjacent Asp473, which based on HsHMGCR in silico simulations (HsHMGCR Glu559 and Asp767) might be expected to hydrogen bond and stabilise the mevaldyl-CoA intermediate51. Further molecular dynamics studies with AtHMG1, its substrate and cofactors might determine if the role of Glu265 is to hydrogen bond to Asp473, or to directly protonate the substrate as previous modelling studies have suggested60,61. Here, we rationally designed a compound with >20-fold preference for plant HMGR in vitro with limited modification to the parent scaffold. Modelling of atorvastatin along with compounds 4 and 7 into the active site of HsHMGCR revealed a single dominant high-affinity binding mode with a large drop in affinity to the next most favourable binding mode. Atorvastatin exhibited the highest affinity followed by compound 7 and 4 (Supplementary Fig. 6) consistent with in vitro results (Fig. 4). Modelling with AtHMG1 revealed more varied poses of the analogues, with similar affinities between the most favourable binding modes. These binding modes are possibly facilitated by a wider active site and flexibility in the Lβ2-Lα1 loop region (Supplementary Fig. 3c) and might account for the difficulty we had in obtaining co-crystal structures for AtHMG1. The lower affinity for AtHMG1 than HsHMGCR for compounds 4 and 7 suggests further molecular dynamics simulations and crystallographic studies may be necessary to help reveal the molecular basis of in vitro specificity (Fig. 4). Notably, selectivity over HsHMGCR was also obtained by targeting the same Lβ2-Lα1 loop region in Manduca sexta using gem-difluoromethylenated HMGR inhibitors35. Similar derivatives may also prove to be selective for plant HMGRs. Overall, the developed compounds provide a framework for further structure-based rational herbicide design targeting the Lβ2-Lα1 loop region of AtHMG1, which could be validated for selectivity in mammalian in vivo studies. Greater species selectivity might be obtainable by targeting the N-terminal domain of HMGR, which is highly divergent between humans and plants and is absent from class II HMGRs. A recent crystal structure of the regulatory elements that interact with the N-terminal domain in HsHMGCR and studies of compounds that increase HMGR degradation suggest that this could be an alternative mechanism to lower cholesterol levels16,18. Future studies of the regulatory elements interacting with plant HMGR N-terminal domain and complexed crystal structures might in the same way also provide an avenue to develop more species-specific inhibitors of HMGR. The regulatory elements that control plant lipid metabolism might also provide new herbicidal targets, just as the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 and angiopoietin-like 3 are providing new avenues for the treatment of hypercholesterolaemia62,63. By analysing the AtHMG1 crystal structure and sequences in fungal biosynthetic gene clusters, we identified a mutation conferring statin resistance without adversely affecting catalytic activity. Overexpressing this mutant protein in A. thaliana demonstrated its potential as a tolerance trait, but further investigations are needed. These could include (i) the efficacy of this protein mutant in different species; (ii) optimisation of expression and regulation, by modifying the N-terminal domain; (iii) its effects on sterol levels and seed set64; and (iv) determining what HMGR inhibitor residues remain in the treated crop or soil. Future studies might also focus on other residues that potentially impart resistance, such as the end region of the Sβ4 strand (residues 387–390), that show conservation in putative resistance genes from Penicillium citrinum and Xylaria grammica and could affect binding of the butyryl group of natural statins. We envisage that the development and discovery of new, natural product herbicides65,66 might also benefit from a similar approach to engineering resistance alleles from biosynthetic gene clusters containing compounds or targets of interest.