3. Discussion The transport of bacteriocins from the cytoplasm to the extracellular environment is a complex process usually involving Gram-positive bacteria in the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transport system, which consists of multidomain membrane proteins powered by the energy from ATP binding and hydrolysis to expel bacteriocins across the membrane hydrophobic barrier [30]. In addition to the transport of bacteriocins and peptides involved in quorum sensing, the ABC transport system may have a role in resistance to bacteriocins such as nisin and bacitracin [31]. ABC transporters form one of the largest families of membrane proteins are present in different life lineages. They are able to transport small ions as well as large proteins [32]. Notably, ABC transporters can serve for outward or inward flows [33]. The proteins of the ABC transport system consist of four domains, of which two are hydrophobic transmembrane domains (TMD), which bind and transport the substrates, and two hydrophilic cytosolic nucleotide-binding domains (NBD), which are the site of ATP binding and hydrolysis [14]. The ABC transporter system is not the only system in Gram-positive bacteria to transport bacteriocins. Indeed, a number of class II bacteriocins, such as bacteriocin 31, enterocin P, bacteriocin T8, divergicin A, and lactococcin 972, can be secreted across cell membranes through the Sec-dependent pathway [6]. It was reported that Gram-positive bacteria can predominantly use the ABC transporters to transport bacteriocins outside the cytoplasm, and in some cases, the Sec-dependent pathway [6]. However, it would be interesting to know if there are bacteriocins capable of using both pathways. For the moment, this information is still lacking, although it has been reported in the case of bottromycin A2, which is a RiPP containing macrocyclic amidine and unusual β-methylated amino acid residues [34]. In the case of the two-peptide leaderless EntDD14, genes encoding the ABC transporters are included in a cluster of 10 genes. Genes ddG, ddH, ddI, and ddJ are most likely encoding the components of the ABC transporters involved in the transport of EntDD14. While the role of DdG encoded by the ddG gene remains to be determined, the other genes code for well-known products. The gene ddH encodes a putative efflux Resistance-nodulation-division (RND) transporter periplasmic adaptor subunit, and ddI and ddJ genes encode an ATP-binding protein of the ATPase family and a putative macrolide export ATP-binding/permease protein (MacB), respectively. Bioinformatic analyses underpinned a high percentage of identity between DdHIJ and FGH proteins, which are part of the enterocin As-48-ABC transporters. The percentages of identity were 94%, 98%, and 98%, respectively. However, the identity between DdG and E protein, which represents its counterpart from As-48, was found to be ~46%. In respect to EntDD14, it has become evident that the ABC transporter is not the only actor taking this role. Indeed, partial or total deletion of the ABC transporter system does not abolish the transport of EntDD14 outside of the cytoplasm, arguing that another pathway independent of the ABC system is involved. This independent pathway may imply DdE and DdF pleckstrin homology domain-containing proteins that may form potential channels, as discussed above and previously reported [26]. In related to this, recently we established that E. faecalis 14, deficient in proteins DdE and DdF, is unable to transport EntDD14 into the extracellular medium, as the bacteriocin was not detected in the ΔddE and ΔddF mutant supernatant cultures. On the contrary, EntDD14 is accumulated intracellularly, exerting a toxic effect. From these data, we can conclude that there is a potential interrelationship between the two systems: the ABC transporter DdGHIJ and the novel pathway composed of DdE and DdF proteins. Such an independent but interacting system has already been reported in other leaderless bacteriocins such as aureocin A53, in which Orf7 and Orf8, which are homologous to DdE and DdF, are involved in the transport of this bacteriocin [27]. It should be pointed out that, in the case of aureocin, the alteration of the ABC transporters decreased the transport of this bacteriocin [27]. Thus, in both systems, it is clear that the ABC transporters are unable to transport the newly formed bacteriocins in the absence of DdE and DdF in the case of EntDD14, or their counterparts Orf7 and Orf8 in the case of aureocin A53. Further studies are required to decrypt the interplay between both systems and their dependence or lack thereof on the energy from ATP hydrolysis. In respect to the contributions of the EntDD14 transporters, either the ABC machinery, which is composed of DdG, DdH, DdI, and DdJ proteins, or the novel likely channel pathway composed of proteins DdE, DdF, or DdEF with resistance to extracellular EntDD14, we show here that ABC transporter DdGHIJ plays a role with intermediate profile, but DdEF does not. Interestingly, ABC transporters of As-48, which are named AS-48EFGH, also confer resistance to this bacteriocin, when it is added extracellularly [22]. In the present work, we strengthen the former hypothesis in which the ABC transporter DdGHIJ is not the unique molecular actor involved in the transport of EntDD14. Indeed, using the triple and quadruple mutant strains constructed here (ΔddHIJ and ΔddGHIJ), we established that the production of EntDD14 is not fully completed, as it is in the WT strain, in spite of the expression of genes encoding this bacteriocin. An independent system constituted of DdE and DdF proteins associated in the form of a protein complex whose organizational conformation reveals a channel that can serve as an exit route for the EntDD14 is absolutely and definitely required. On the other hand, we established that the ABC transporter involved in the translocation of EntDD14 has a role in the resistance to this bacteriocin. The phenotypic results of the mutants obtained throughout these works support the following hypothesis. To transport EntDD14 outside the cell, the bacterium uses the DdEF channel as a primary non-ATP-dependent transport up to a certain concentration of EntDD14 in the extracellular medium. After that, the bacterium will resort to the use of the ABC transporter composed of DdGHIJ which has to pump more bacteriocin into the extracellular medium. This ABC system requires ATP to transport the bacteriocin in the opposite direction of the concentration gradient. This ABC transporter is also involved in the protection of the bacterium against the bacteriocin accumulated outside the cell. This hypothesis would explain the fact that a ddGHIJ quadruple mutant continues to produce ~25% of the bacteriocin compared to the WT and the fact that DdE and/or DdF mutants are unable to externalize EntDD14. The two systems, DdEF and DdGHIJ, should operate synergistically to control the flow of bacteriocin across the membrane, through a mechanism that remains to be understood.