Discussion TM is active in both human and bacterial cells; thus, off-target effects of antibiotic use put patients at risk for species depletion, antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and intestinal disease. Genotoxic K. oxytoca and K. grimontii are early colonizers of the human intestine. Microbiome development monitored during the first month of life for a large cohort of UK infants found that carriage rates for K. oxytoca alone reached 9% in neonates delivered vaginally and 20% following caesarian section15. Genotoxic species may constitute a larger fraction of the gut microbiome in infants than in adults, but cytotoxicity is common to isolates of healthy adult (42%) and infant carriers (49%) (refs. 51,52). The incidence of colitis caused by bacterial overgrowth in neonates—resulting in some cases of necrotizing enterocolitis24—as well as AAHC in children, adults and the elderly23 underscore the point that humans are long-lived hosts and carriers may experience multiple episodes of toxicity over a lifetime. The current study demonstrates that genotoxic Klebsiella spp. impact microbial evolution in the mouse and potentially in human hosts. This is possible both during a transient bloom—as recapitulated in this antibiotic dysbiosis model—or through lower exposure over a longer timescale when producer densities return to homeostatic levels. Our findings may be particularly relevant for neonates. The microbial community in the newborn gut is dynamic during the first years of life53–57. Maturation of these early communities contributes importantly to a child’s metabolic and immune development36,58,59, whereas disruptions predispose children to immune-mediated disorders60,61 and expand the reservoir of antibiotic resistance genes they carry16. Our findings thus raise concern that early life experience with antibiotics, medications or dietary changes that trigger dysbiotic outgrowth or otherwise affect ecological opportunity will add the additional pressure of TM exposure in the infant gut. In such cases, increased microbial volatility and concomitant loss of community resilience could further impair this critical phase of microbial maturation. Incidents of TM-induced destabilization and mutational evolution of the gut ecosystem may be repetitive events over a lifetime. Health care settings and factors driving dysbiotic overgrowth of K. oxytoca—from chemotherapies to immunodeficiencies—pose challenges for colonized patients at all life stages62. A dysbiosis-induced event of TM secretion is self-limiting in patients with AAHC20 and as shown here in the mouse (Figs. 2b and 3a), yet when we applied a new insult, such as a higher dose or a different class of antibiotic, strong TM production was again induced in colonized mice (Extended Data Fig. 6c,d). The mutagenic environment created by a single asymptomatic event of genotoxic Klebsiella outgrowth was sufficient to expand the array of antibiotic resistance determinants available to gut bacteria. Colonization with genotoxic Klebsiella spp. may thus put individuals at risk for future resistant infections originating from the commensals and opportunistic pathogens they carry. In addition to driving resistance emergence in vivo, hypermutator activity provoked under these conditions would be expected to have broad evolutionary impact on gut bacteria. The general nature of TM’s reactivity towards guanine coupled with the susceptibility of numerous and diverse taxa underscores the potential for widespread genetic variation within the host microbiota. Single mutations or combinations thereof that accumulate during the timescale of exposure may accelerate adaptations to changes in environmental and community contexts or upon introduction of novel abiotic stressors. The outcome of structural and functional variation will vary between individuals and within individuals over time, shaped by the size of the til+ population and selective forces in changing gut environments. Repeated antibiotic perturbation is known to challenge the long-term stability of the human distal gut microbiota37. This study reveals the concomitant risk of elevated mutation and destabilization of the gut ecosystem that results from transient exposure to a broad-spectrum genotoxin. The consequences of these combined forces on the resilience of the gut community remain unknown. Our findings provide a good starting point to ask whether and how the bacterial production of drug-like molecules in humans can be regulated to reduce intestinal damage and increase both community resistance and resilience.