Discussion In nature, processive (non-dissociative) catalysis is omnipresent in enzymes that synthesise, modify, and degrade biopolymers such as nucleic acids, proteins, and polysaccharides, and has been described in nucleases, peptidases, proteases, proteasomes, and endo- and exo-acting polysaccharide hydrolases22–25,28–31,38. Processive polysaccharide hydrolases have certain common characteristics that stem from the architectures of their catalytic sites that dictate spatial arrangements governing substrate specificity and binding (including directionality) and the dispositions of catalytic residues to ensure a high efficacy of catalysis. Processive endo- and exo-acting cellulases23,28,39,40 and exo-acting chitinases24,25,29,31 are known to be driven by processive hydrolysis or substrate-assisted catalysis, and the GH3 exo-acting β-d-glucan glycohydrolases with a pocket-shaped active site (such as HvExoI) by substrate-product assisted processive catalysis22. The difference between these two types is in the role of a hydrolytic product, that in the latter group evokes the formation of a lateral cavity, which serves as a conduit for Glc egress to allow for the next catalytic cycle using the retaining catalytic mechanism (Fig. 9). This type of catalysis enables multiple events that proceed without an enzyme losing contact with oligo- or polymeric substrates, contrary to distributive catalysis, where the catalyst follows a conventional association-conversion-dissociation pattern.Fig. 9Mechanistic view of the catalytic function of HvExoI, a family GH3 enzyme.a HvExoI uses the retaining catalytic mechanism, where nucleophile Asp285 (magenta) and acid/base catalyst Glu491 (green) play key roles in substrate hydrolysis1–3. b Reaction kinetics indicates the formation of Michaelis complexes (E-S and E~S), and enzyme-product complexes before (E~P1~Glc) and following the first Glc egress (E~P1), and after hydrolysis of P1 (E~Glc)1, 2. S and P1 are trimeric and dimeric molecules, respectively. First-order rate constants are shown. Entrapped Glc product from E~Glc is displaced after a new substrate is attached. The hydrolytic cycle with a (1,3)-linked substrate is repeated until it is hydrolysed to Glc (indicated by vertical and horizontal lines). c Simplified mechanism of Glc displacement with a disaccharide22. After the disaccharide (empty blue and filled grey squares) bound in the −1 and +1 subsites (step 1) is hydrolysed and the reducing end Glc (aglycon) diffuses away from +1 subsite, the non-reducing end Glc (cyan square) remains non-covalently trapped. After a new dimer binds (step 3) and advances to the catalytic site, Glc modifies its binding patterns and egresses (large arrow) via a transient lateral cavity (cylinder in dotted lines) formed near the Trp clamp (step 4)22. Curved arrows indicate dimer entries into the catalytic site. d Glc displacement paths in WT (left panels), and the W434A mutant (right panels) with Glc and the G3OG dimer, calculated through cMD and GPathFinder. Large arrows indicate Glc positions at the initial (step 1) and after the final (step 4 – following Glc departure from −1 subsites) stages of catalysis (this work). Fig. 9Mechanistic view of the catalytic function of HvExoI, a family GH3 enzyme.a HvExoI uses the retaining catalytic mechanism, where nucleophile Asp285 (magenta) and acid/base catalyst Glu491 (green) play key roles in substrate hydrolysis1–3. b Reaction kinetics indicates the formation of Michaelis complexes (E-S and E~S), and enzyme-product complexes before (E~P1~Glc) and following the first Glc egress (E~P1), and after hydrolysis of P1 (E~Glc)1, 2. S and P1 are trimeric and dimeric molecules, respectively. First-order rate constants are shown. Entrapped Glc product from E~Glc is displaced after a new substrate is attached. The hydrolytic cycle with a (1,3)-linked substrate is repeated until it is hydrolysed to Glc (indicated by vertical and horizontal lines). c Simplified mechanism of Glc displacement with a disaccharide22. After the disaccharide (empty blue and filled grey squares) bound in the −1 and +1 subsites (step 1) is hydrolysed and the reducing end Glc (aglycon) diffuses away from +1 subsite, the non-reducing end Glc (cyan square) remains non-covalently trapped. After a new dimer binds (step 3) and advances to the catalytic site, Glc modifies its binding patterns and egresses (large arrow) via a transient lateral cavity (cylinder in dotted lines) formed near the Trp clamp (step 4)22. Curved arrows indicate dimer entries into the catalytic site. d Glc displacement paths in WT (left panels), and the W434A mutant (right panels) with Glc and the G3OG dimer, calculated through cMD and GPathFinder. Large arrows indicate Glc positions at the initial (step 1) and after the final (step 4 – following Glc departure from −1 subsites) stages of catalysis (this work). Mechanistic view of the catalytic function of HvExoI, a family GH3 enzyme. a HvExoI uses the retaining catalytic mechanism, where nucleophile Asp285 (magenta) and acid/base catalyst Glu491 (green) play key roles in substrate hydrolysis1–3. b Reaction kinetics indicates the formation of Michaelis complexes (E-S and E~S), and enzyme-product complexes before (E~P1~Glc) and following the first Glc egress (E~P1), and after hydrolysis of P1 (E~Glc)1, 2. S and P1 are trimeric and dimeric molecules, respectively. First-order rate constants are shown. Entrapped Glc product from E~Glc is displaced after a new substrate is attached. The hydrolytic cycle with a (1,3)-linked substrate is repeated until it is hydrolysed to Glc (indicated by vertical and horizontal lines). c Simplified mechanism of Glc displacement with a disaccharide22. After the disaccharide (empty blue and filled grey squares) bound in the −1 and +1 subsites (step 1) is hydrolysed and the reducing end Glc (aglycon) diffuses away from +1 subsite, the non-reducing end Glc (cyan square) remains non-covalently trapped. After a new dimer binds (step 3) and advances to the catalytic site, Glc modifies its binding patterns and egresses (large arrow) via a transient lateral cavity (cylinder in dotted lines) formed near the Trp clamp (step 4)22. Curved arrows indicate dimer entries into the catalytic site. d Glc displacement paths in WT (left panels), and the W434A mutant (right panels) with Glc and the G3OG dimer, calculated through cMD and GPathFinder. Large arrows indicate Glc positions at the initial (step 1) and after the final (step 4 – following Glc departure from −1 subsites) stages of catalysis (this work). The crucial role of substrate binding in HvExoI implies a pair of the aromatic Trp286 and Trp434 residues that form a clamp at the +1 subsite, which is positioned next to a pocket-shaped site at the −1 subsite, housing the Asp285 and Glu491 catalysts1–3. These residues, typically around 5.5-6.5 Å apart locked in a rigid configuration via a dense H-bond network, are responsible for the hydrolysis of oligo- and polymeric β-d-glucosides to release Glc from non-reducing ends of substrates (Figs. 1a, b, and 9). To understand the mechanism that drives the unidirectional motion of the Glc product in HvExoI during substrate-product assisted processive catalysis, and specifically the roles of Trp286 and Trp434, we analysed substrate specificity in the context of elementary steps of Glc movement. We created HvExoI mutants replacing Trp286 and Trp434, with Ala, Phe, Tyr, and His residues, and compared their substrate specificity, steady-state kinetics, and inhibition parameters relative to WT. We conducted atomic resolution (1.5 Å − 2.5 Å) X-ray crystallographic analyses of 25 structures of WT and mutant forms in complex with positional isomers of thio-analogues, revealing the details of β-d-glucoside binding. We examined the conformational behaviour of thio-analogues and O-linked β-d-glucosides, and explored the binding and hydrolysis of the G4OG3OG natural substrate via cMD and QM/MM MD metadynamics simulations. To define the atomistic details and dynamics of reactant movements, we examined the unidirectional motion of Glc and its egress, and substrate sliding through the catalytic site or binding and displacements of laminaritriose and laminarihexaose hydrolytic products in the W434H and W434A mutants through cMD, GaMD, and GPathFinder simulations. These data were corroborated with phylogenomic analyses of GH3 family members, to trace the evolutionary origin of substrate-product assisted processivity, where β-d-glucan glucohydrolases are expected to retain an aromatic Trp286/Trp434 clamp. In the unrooted phylogenetic tree (Fig. 1c; Supplementary Table 1), we observed the clustering of plant β-d-glucan glucohydrolases to subclades 1-3 with both Trp residues conserved or diversified. We detected that through the evolutionary history of plants, β-d-glucan glucohydrolases with the aromatic clamp are absent in red alga Porphyra and unicellular green algae Cyanobacterium and Chlamydomonas, and amoeba Dictyostelium, and have emerged with the evolution of land plants – these enzymes are present in liverworts and mosses (Embryophyte), ferns and conifers (Tracheophyte), a basal Angiosperm Amborella trichopoda, and dicotyledons (Eudicots) and monocotyledons (including grasses) (Fig. 1c). The β-d-glucan glucohydrolases with the Trp286/Trp434 signature are also richly represented in bacteria, e.g. the sludge Chloroflexi bacterium fermenting carbohydrates41, and a plant-pathogenic Xanthomonas (Fig. 1c), similarly to other bacteria of the GH3 family4 (Bacteroides ovatus, Niveispirillum irakense, Pseudoalteromonas sp. BB1), although β-d-glucan glucohydrolases from Rhodothermus marinus and Saccharopolyspora erythraea have the Tyr286-Trp434 signature34. During the investigations of physicochemical properties and substrate specificity in HvExoI and its mutants, we detected that the impact of Trp286 and Trp434 mutations on the hydrolysis of 4NP-Glc under a variety of pH and temperature conditions was relatively small compared to WT, except for W286H with its pH optimum shifted to the alkaline region (from 5.25 for WT to 6.7 for W286H) (Supplementary Fig. 1) due to a proximity effect to Asp285. However, the relative hydrolytic rates and specificities of mutants with (1,2)-, (1,3)-, (1,4)- and (1,6)-linked poly-, and oligosaccharides, and aryl-glycosides, were substantially altered. The W434A mutant lost its hydrolytic activities with polymers and oligomers, except (1,3)-linked oligosaccharides, and acted as a strict (1,3)-β-d-specific β-d-glucosidase (Supplementary Table 2). In this mutant, no activity was observed with laminarin [(1,3)-β-linked polymer with (1,6)-β-branching at the 3:2 ratio42] suggesting that the binding of branched substrates may be influenced by steric effects. These modified hydrolytic rates in the Trp286 and Trp434 mutants were followed by apparent first- and second-order rate kinetic (Supplementary Table 3) and apparent inhibition constants (Supplementary Table 4). Changes in these parameters suggested that Trp286 and Trp434 play key roles in orienting positionally isomeric β-d-glucosides towards the formation of productive HvExoI:substrate complexes. To address the atomic details underlying substrate binding and hydrolysis, the crystalline WT and mutant HvExoI forms were perfused with (1,2)-, (1,3)-, (1,4)- and (1,6)-linked thio-β-d-glucosides followed by X-ray crystallography analyses (Figs. 2–4; Supplementary Figs. 2–4; Supplementary Tables 5 and 6) to assess the contributions of residues that interacted with glycone/aglycone moieties and thus their involvements in catalysis. Our interpretations of the electron density maps of these complexes (25 in total) led us to postulate that it was primarily the aromatic clamp, that binds variously linked thio-glucosides at the +1 subsite, and mediates broad substrate specificity in HvExoI. In the bound (1,2)- and (1,6)-linked thio-glucosides, we observed 4C1 conformations for Glc moieties at the −1 subsite, or 4H3 or 4H3/4E respective conformations for the (1,3)- and (1,4)-linked thio-glucosides (Supplementary Table 7), suggesting that certain conformational flexibility of glucopyranose rings was present. This was supported by our previous observations that d-glucono−1,5-lactone (transition state analogue) with inherently a half-chair conformation was an effective inhibitor (Ki = 2.1 × 10−6 M)21. This is acceptable because the active site must be able not only to recognise the ground state of saccharides in 4C1 conformation but also distorted conformations43,44. We concluded that the electron density maps observed in the complexes could represent snapshots of time-space averaged conformations, that are formed at different time intervals on the substrate-binding trajectory from the ground to transition states. One significant observation stemmed from the comparative analyses in terms of binding of (1,2)-, (1,3)-, (1,4)- and (1,6)-linked thio-glucosides by HvExoI (Figs. 2–4; Supplementary Figs. 2–4). In these WT complexes, the Glc moiety at the −1 subsite was oriented almost identically, contrary to the Glc moiety at the +1 subsite that adopted various orientations. In G3SG the apolar β face of Glc moiety was exposed to Trp286, while in the HvExoI:G2SG,:G4SG, and:G6SG complexes, the apolar thio-analogue sides mostly faced Trp434. It is known that in these stacking interactions, the saccharide surface encounters a side-chain aromatic moiety when an apolar face of a saccharide exposes three or more C–H groups close in space45. Concerning the substrate specificity from another angle, it is important to compare the G6SG position in enzyme forms. While the Glc moieties of G6SG at the −1 subsite were oriented nearly identically in WT and mutant structures, the position of the Glc moiety at the +1 subsite varied – it was identical in WT and W286A, while in W434A it was rotated by 120° through the x-axis. This comparison underscored the pivotal role of Trp434 in correctly orienting saccharide substrates engaged in stacking interactions, also known as dispersion-driven C-H-π forces (consisting of London dispersion forces)46. The geometries of these interactions with Trp, Phe, Tyr, and His involved face-to-face geometries, although the edge-face and offset stacked geometries also occur in protein complexes47. These stacking interactions are mediated by Trp residues in 40%, trailed by Tyr, Phe, and His48. To address the structural features of β-d-glucosides binding (or Michaelis complexes) in HvExoI at the atomic level, we compared the conformational behaviour of thio-analogues bound in crystalline forms (Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6) and after cMD simulations (Supplementary Fig. 8). These analyses revealed 4C1 conformations of the glucopyranose moieties in the +1 subsite (Fig. 5; Supplementary Fig. 8; Supplementary Table 7), and the pseudo-4C1 conformation for the sugar moiety bound at the −1 subsite, although previous cMD analyses of a fungal GH3 enzyme did not find evidence of sugar distortion47. These findings supported the analyses of puckering conformations of glucopyranose rings in Michaelis complexes of other exo-acting GH enzymes2,35,36, and suggested that these exo-acting enzymes differ from endo-acting ones, where substrate distortions were systematically observed49–53. Additionally, via cMD simulations and QM/MM MD metadynamics, we investigated the trajectory of the G3OG product originating from the G4OG3OG substrate, where the Glc moieties in 4C1 conformations and FEL maps shared properties (Fig. 6; Supplementary Figs. 10 and 11). The cluster analysis of the G3OG product in WT and W434A showed positions in markedly different proportions (Fig. 6b). This led us to conclude that the G3OG product could not overcome a high energy barrier to achieve the productive binding mode, due to an unfavourable orientation of the Glc moiety in the −1 subsite. Here, the CH2OH substituent faced the acid/base Glu491 residue, while the anomeric carbon was positioned away from the Asp285 nucleophile. A change in the ring puckering of the Glc moiety could eventually cause the anomeric carbon to approach Asp285, but such a possibility was eliminated based on the calculated FEL map (Fig. 6a). In W434A the G3OG product disposition allowed more flexibility, but G3OG still faced a high energy barrier to achieving a productive binding mode. These findings have profound implications for the hydrolysis of mixed-linkage β-d-gluco-oligosaccharides by HvExoI, where the G4OG3OG natural substrate cannot slide through the active site from the +2 and +1 to the +1 and −1 subsites, although it could utilise the lateral cavity exit mechanism for Glc egress. The binding and hydrolysis of the G4OG3OG natural substrate for HvExoI proceed in two steps: (i) after the 1st glycosidic linkage (G4OG) from the non-reducing end is cleaved off, and Glc egresses through the lateral cavity; (ii) the G3OG product diffuses out of the active site and re-rebinds in the correct orientation to form a productive enzyme:substrate complex. This distributive catalytic process can occur with trimeric or longer substrates that are (1,2)-, (1,4)-, (1,6)- or (1,4;1,3)-linked, but not with (1,3)-linked substrates, which utilise both assets of processivity, i.e. Glc egress and substrate single-chain sliding movement forward through the catalytic site without dissociation. Notably, in HvExoI, the processive character is paramount to the catalytic efficiency and is correlated with high kcat values of the (1,3)-linked substrates (Supplementary Table 3). Similar (i-ii) steps can be used by G4OG4OG3G, which with G4OG3OG are the key low-molecular hydrolytic products generated from mixed-linkage (1,4;1,3)-β-d-glucans – polysaccharide components in cereal cell walls5,6,54. We alluded to the pivotal role of Trp434 in HvExoI that through stacking interactions participated in the orientations of substrates to positions amenable for hydrolysis through substrate-product assisted processivity. To extend our knowledge of the role of Trp434 in these processes, and why the evolution converged to Trp434, we applied cMD, GaMD55, and GPathFinder37 simulations, where cMD simulations safeguard the stability of complexes in geometries close to those in crystal structures, GaMD provide an enhanced sampling of conformational spaces, and GPathFinder explores dynamic traits of reactants binding or unbinding, via backbone motions and side-chain optimisations of discrete rotameric states. For these studies, we selected two mutants, which retained broad substrate specificity (W434H), or behaved as a strict (1,3)-β-d-glucosidase (W434A). Summarising these findings, we revealed that: (i) the stability and time occupancy of the laminaribiose or laminaripentaose products in the subsites +1 and +2 were affected by W434H and W434A mutations; (ii) in WT and W434H, the lateral Glc egress path was used during substrate-product assisted processivity (path 1; Fig. 8); (iii) in W434A, Glc exited through the W434A-Trp286 clamp and a gap formed by the non-conservative W434A mutation, and without engaging substrate-product assisted processivity (path 2; Fig. 8); (iv) in WT and both mutants, Glc egressed through the aromatic Trp286/Trp434 clamp, when no oligosaccharides are present at this site (path 3; Fig. 8), which was energetically most favoured; (v) substrate-product assisted processivity can only be utilised, when the unbinding of the product at the +1 subsite is slower than Glc egress through the lateral cavity (Figs. 7–9; Supplementary Fig. 14; Supplementary Movies 1–3). Finally, our unconstrained MD simulations of HvExoI complexed with laminaripentaose, and Glc removed from the −1 subsite revealed that the sliding of laminaripentaose proceeded spontaneously, even in W434H or W434A, meaning that all enzymes position Glc moieties in the active sites correctly due to the structural complementarity. Importantly, the combined experimental and computational approaches addressed the key role of the evolutionary conserved Trp286/Trp434 clamp in the GH3 family, which secures Glc unbinding and through C-H-π interactions guarantees the optimal binding of hydrolytic products while preventing their attachments by reducing-terminals. These approaches also revealed another important function, which is to assure that when 1,3-β-d-linked polymeric substrates bind to the active site and are hydrolysed with Glc egressing through an ad-hoc formed lateral cavity, the hydrolytic products could slide through the catalytic site and are rectified via substrate-product assisted processivity to warrant a next hydrolytic event. This process is accompanied by a cork-like motion between domains 1 and 222, which associates with an active site opened and closed states (Supplementary Movies 1–3). Our studies provide a blueprint for emerging studies of reactant movements to advance the knowledge of catalysis in hydrolases and demonstrate that specificity and efficiency could be engineered via residue alterations that dock substrates into active sites. Particularly, the work through our multiscale strategy contributes to the understanding of catalysis in GH3 exo-hydrolases by defining  structural trajectories and mechanisms for the breakdown of oligo- and polysaccharides (Fig. 9). We suggest that our findings could be utilised in enzyme design, as they are correlated with the statistical energy inferred from a maximum entropy model of homologous sequences56. Further, this knowledge can be exploited in the biomolecular design of artificial molecular motors57,58, and more broadly in biotechnology and drug design, where enzymes are sought as environmentally friendly and cost-effective alternatives in bioremediation, and applications in medicine and pharmaceutics.