4. Discussion In this study, we found that 2,4-DAPG produced by beneficial bacteria of the Pseudomonas genus plays an important role in the growth inhibition of the oomycete pathogen A. euteiches on culture plates and suppression of the pea Aphanomyces root rot disease in greenhouse. Our results are consistent with the previous reports that 2,4-DAPG produced by strains of Pseudomonas spp. is a major determinant in the biocontrol of many soilborne plant diseases due to its broad-spectrum toxicity against bacteria, fungi, oomycetes, and nematodes [41,42,43]. This is the first report that 2,4-DAPG inhibits A. euteiches and contributes to the beneficial bacteria-mediated biocontrol of pea Aphanomyces root rot disease. Many beneficial bacteria produce multiple antibiotics that inhibit plant pathogens. Two beneficial bacterial strains, P. protegens Pf-5 and P. fluorescens 2P24, were used in this study to determine the role of antibiotics in the growth inhibition of A. euteiches. In addition to the 2,4-DAPG, strain 2P24 is known to produce another antibiotic hydrogen cyanide [30], and strain Pf-5 can produce at least another five antibiotics including pyoluteorin, pyrrolnitrin, orfamide A, rhizoxin, and hydrogen cyanide [40]. The important role of 2,4-DAPG in the inhibition of A. euteiches is clearly supported by the results that the Pf-5 and 2P24 mutants that lack 2,4-DAPG exhibited greatly reduced inhibition against A. euteiches compared to their wild type strains (Figure 2). The anti-oomycete activities of hydrogen cyanide, pyoluteorin, pyrrolnitrin, orfamide A, and rhizoxin have been reported previously in various phytopathogenic systems [46,47,48,49,50]. However, our results show that Pf-5 mutants that lack these five antibiotics retained strong inhibition against A. euteiches, suggesting that these five antibiotics of Pf-5 do not play a major role in the growth inhibition against A. euteiches. The important role of 2,4-DAPG in the inhibition of A. euteiches is also supported by the morphological changes in mycelia (excessive and stunted hyphal branches) of A. euteiches caused by purified 2,4-DAPG (Figure 3) and the reduced disease control efficacy of the 2,4-DAPG nonproducing mutant compared to the 2,4-DAPG producing derivative of Pf-5 (Figure 5). We recognized that the culture conditions used in the inhibition assays may not be conducive for the tested bacterial strains to produce all their antibiotics. For example, the ½ PDA medium used in this study contains a high level of glucose (2%, w/v) which likely represses the biosynthesis of pyoluteorin that is known to inhibit the oomycete pathogen Pythium ultimum [51]. Antibiotics other than 2,4-DAPG may contribute to the inhibition of A. eutriches by Pf-5 in different culture media. Antibiotic production is critical for many beneficial bacteria to inhibit plant pathogens and suppress plant diseases, but expression of antibiotic biosynthesis genes is often influenced by the tri-trophic interactions between the beneficial bacterium, the pathogen, and the host plant [52,53,54]. Using a GFP-based transcriptional reporter system, we found that expression of the 2,4-DAPG biosynthesis gene phlAPf-5 is strongly induced at both transcriptional and translational levels by germinating pea seeds (Figure 4). These results are consistent with our previous report that the 2,4-DAPG biosynthesis genes such as phlDPf-5 are highly expressed in Pf-5 on the germinating pea seeds (Pisum sativum cv. Sugar Snap) in an RNAseq analysis and that 2,4-DAPG was detected on the Pf-5-treated pea seed surfaces [40]. These data support that production of 2,4-DAPG can be activated by the exudates of germinating pea seeds. Diverse metabolites including amino acids, carbohydrates, and organic acids were detected from pea seed exudates [40]. Our current understanding of how these exudates influence the antibiotic production of beneficial bacteria remains limited. Glucose is a known carbohydrate conducive to 2,4-DAPG production of Pf-5 [27,51] and has been detected in pea seed exudate at a moderate level (81.2 g/seed) [40]. However, the roles of the other more abundant carbohydrates including sucrose (1740.3 g/seed) and galactose (845.8 g/seed) and the most abundant amino acids including glutamate (206.4 g/seed) and arginine (86.1 g/seed) in the regulation of antibiotic production by Pf-5 remain unknown. Metabolites secreted by plant pathogens can also influence the antibiotic production of the associated beneficial bacteria. For example, fusaric acid, which is produced by Fusarium spp., inhibits 2,4-DAPG production of Pf-5 [36]. In this study, we found that the expression of phlAPf-5 was not altered by the presence of A. euteiches hyphae (Figure 4). Infection of plant roots by pathogens can cause a metabolic leak that enhances antibiotic production of rhizosphere-associated beneficial microorganisms. For example, expression of phlA by the beneficial bacterium P. protegens CHA0 was increased on barley roots after infection by Pythium ultimum [55]. No or minimal damage of pea seeds were observed by the inoculated A. euteiches in our transcriptional reporter assays, probably due to the short incubation time (24 h) that was used to collect the GFP data of the bacterial reporter. It will be interesting to investigate the dynamic changes of the pea seed/root exudates, especially the metabolites that are known to regulate 2,4-DAPG production, at the different stages of the disease development of pea Aphanomyces root rot in the future. In addition to 2,4-DAPG, many other antimicrobial compounds are known to be produced by strains of the Pseudomonas group and contribute to pathogen inhibition and disease biocontrol by the strains [56]. Characterizing different bacterial isolates that inhibit the growth of the pathogens can help us identify novel antibiotics to control the diseases. In this study, four Pseudomonas isolates were isolated from lentil filed soils and showed clear inhibition against A. euteiches (Figure 1). Among these four Pseudomonas isolates, 40_101 is interesting because of its strong inhibition which is comparable to the model strains Pf-5 and 2P24. The antibiotics produced by these strains were not characterized in this study. Future investigations, including whole genome sequencing analysis and bacterial mutagenesis, of these Pseudomonas isolates may identify new antibiotics for the disease manage of pea Aphanomyces root rot. Bacterial antagonists that belong to different genera including Bacillus, Paenibacillus, Pseudarthrobacter, and Chreyseobacterium were also identified in this work, although their inhibition effects are overall less than the Pseudomonas group. The antibiotic(s) that is(are) required for the growth inhibition of A. euteiches by these antagonists was (were) not investigated in this work. However, it is known that strains of Bacillus spp. and Paenibacillus spp. can produce diverse antibiotics such as lipopeptides that are toxic against plant pathogens including oomycetes [57,58]. The antagonistic bacteria were isolated from fields in Montana and have adapted to the local climates and soil/plant environments. Thus, they can serve as useful microbial resources for the development of biocontrol agents to manage pea Aphanomyces root rot disease in Montana. Molecular identification using 16s rRNA is useful to identify bacteria although its limitation in accurate classification at species level has been recognized especially for strains of the Pseudomonas group [59,60]. The taxonomic classification of the ten bacterial strains isolated in this study was characterized to genus levels via 16s rRNA analysis (Figure 1) and can be further improved by multilocus sequence analysis or whole genome sequencing. Nevertheless, the result that A. euteiches was inhibited by bacterial isolates belonging to distinct genera suggests different antibiotics may be produced by these isolates to suppress the pathogen. In conclusion, diverse groups of soil bacteria including Pseudomonas spp., Bacillus spp., Paenibacillus sp., Pseudarthrobacter sp., and Chreyseobacterium sp. were found to inhibit the growth of A. euteiches. Evidence obtained via genetic and biochemical analysis and GFP-based reporter assays supports that 2,4-DAPG is the major antibiotic required by model strains of the Pseudomonas, including P. protegens Pf-5 and P. fluorescens 2P24, to inhibit the growth of A. euteiches in culture medium and control the Aphanomyces root rot disease on pea plants. Similar approaches can be used in the future to identify and characterize antibiotics required by the isolated antagonistic bacteria to inhibit the growth of A. euteiches.