Discussion Secretion of amphipathic peptides is widespread throughout diverse organisms. How cells evolved to address the secretion of these biomolecules that spontaneously distribute between aqueous and membrane phases remains poorly understood. This is in large part because studying these processes is challenging due to low solubility of the secreted molecule and the membranous transport systems. Circumventing these challenges, we focused on cell-based secretion of PSMs, a family of amphipathic peptides that play diverse roles in staphylococcal physiology and virulence (8). With several unique PSMs coexpressed within S. aureus and other diverse sets produced across staphylococcal species, this system enabled us to make inferences based on the natural differences between PSMs. Our primary discovery is that the hydrophobicity of S. aureus PSMs is strongly associated with secretion through PmtCD. This held true when we tested orthologous transporters from distinct staphylococcal species that encode native PSMs dissimilar to S. aureus PSMs. Our model (Fig. 2D) provides an evolutionary rationale for having two transport systems of amphipathic biomolecules. Immediately after biosynthesis, PSMs can be exported directly from the cytoplasm through AbcA. The PSMs that are not exported by AbcA can instead partition into the inner leaflet of the cell membrane, the extent of which is governed by the overall hydrophobicity. Notably, our model explains the surprising finding that all α-type PSMs when expressed individually are more likely to be exported by AbcA than PmtCD because an extra step of partitioning into the cellular membrane would be required for export through PmtCD. In addition, this entails that partitioning is rate-limiting for PmtCD export. Importantly, the multidrug-resistant ABC transporter P-glycoprotein, which has been thoroughly characterized as accepting hydrophobic substrates laterally through the membrane (25, 26), provides an instructive precedent: Membrane partitioning of a wide range of substrates was found to be rate-limiting, and hydrophobicity was correlated with ATPase activity (27). Our model also explains why PmtCD, but not AbcA, is essential for staphylococcal viability while PSMs are actively produced because only PmtCD can remove PSMs that partition into the bacterial membrane and prevent PSMs from accumulating to toxic levels. Several characterized BGCs of amphipathic bacteriocins such as the lanthipeptides nisin, gallidermin/epidermin, and subtilin; the thiopeptide lactocillin; and the cyclic peptides AS-48 and circularin A; and the fibupeptide lugdunin each encode for two transport systems (1–6). Often, secretion is attributed to one system and self-immunity to the other. These attributions are consistent with our model and results reported here. Furthermore, our model predicts that the secretion and self-immunity transport systems encoded in these BGCs export from the cytoplasmic and membranous milieus, respectively. In addition, the self-immunity transporters may enable increased production of the bacteriocin by providing a secondary transport pathway that protects the membrane of the producing cell. Likewise, it is worth noting that PSMs are abundantly produced by Staphylococci (15), which—especially considering its PSM-dependent essentiality—appears to have been enabled by the export role of PmtCD. While it is often assumed that the immunity transporters remove bacteriocins from the membrane, evidence for this hypothesis has remained limited to peptide release assays (2, 28) from cells due to the difficulty of measuring transport in biochemical assays or in reconstructing the pathway of a substrate from structures. Here we took advantage of the natural diversity of PSMs produced by Staphylococci and provide an independent line of supporting evidence that the immunity transporters accept molecules from the membrane for efflux. As a corollary, our model implies that the non-immunity transporters may accept their substrates directly from the cytoplasm. Our results are consistent with a high-resolution structure of PmtCD in the apo-state (19). PmtCD adopts a type V ABC transporter fold, which has been associated with lateral access of substrates from the membrane (29, 30). However, this observation relied on a limited set of currently available structures of type V ABC transporters that transport lipids or lipidated molecules residing primarily within the membrane with little to no aqueous presence (31–35). Thus, our data provide functional evidence for membrane access into a type V ABC transporter in which the transported molecules—the PSMs—partition between membrane and cytoplasmic milieus. Interestingly, the ATP-bound state of PmtCD possesses lateral surface grooves lined with hydrophobic residues that span the lipid core of the membrane and are large enough to accommodate α-type PSM peptides. These grooves are plausible sites of initial interaction between PSMs and PmtCD that adhere to our model. Interestingly, PmtCD also protects bacterial cells from host-produced amphipathic peptides such as LL-37. This raises the question of how PmtCD is active against amphipathic peptides originating from outside bacterial cells that would initially partition into the outer leaflet. Amphipathic peptides can spontaneously translocate to the inner leaflet where they could enter PmtCD and be extruded from the membrane. Alternatively, the PmtCD lateral grooves could conceivably accept substrates and therefore extrude amphipathic peptides from the outer membrane leaflet as well. Future functional and structural studies will be needed to clarify the transport trajectory of PSMs and AMPs through PmtCD. No structure has been reported for AbcA, and the existing literature, aside for PSM secretion, provides no direct evidence of AbcA transport with which we can evaluate our model. One report describes an abcA mutant that exhibits faster autolysis (36), and several describe conflicting results in which abcA inactivation or overexpression increased resistance to β-lactam antibiotics (36–38). Thus, future biophysical and biochemical studies are needed to further elucidate the transport pathway, for PSMs or otherwise, via AbcA. PSMα2 consistently deviated in our regression analyses. Interestingly, PSMα2 differs from PSMα1 at only three amino acid residues. While specific PSMα2 interactions with AbcA could help explain the deviation, we also note that PSMα2 exhibits substantially less α-helical structure in aqueous buffer than PSMα1 (39). Thus, because peptide folding impacts membrane partitioning (20), PSMα2 may partition less into the cellular membrane than would be predicted by hydrophobicity alone, which in turn would increase transport by AbcA according to our model. In S. aureus, PSMs have acquired multiple virulence-associated roles, making PSMs important targets in therapeutic strategies to combat certain types of MRSA infections. Our study suggests that blocking PSM efflux by inhibiting PmtCD or AbcA offers distinct advantages. Blocking PmtCD should result in antimicrobial effects from both self-produced PSMs and mammalian antimicrobial peptide accumulation in bacterial cell membranes. In contrast, blocking AbcA may yield an antivirulence approach with reduced antimicrobial effects that result in a weaker selective pressures to develop resistance to AbcA-blockade (40). Furthermore, our study pinpoints AbcA as a target for treatment of atopic dermatitis given the importance of δ-toxin in promoting allergic responses (41) and that AbcA is the dominant δ-toxin transporter.