Discussion The biosynthesis of Put, as the precursor for some natural products, has been intensively studied in various bacteria. However, the current issue of the assembly of free Put into natural products remained unclear. Only two similar studies about siderophores vibriobactins60 and serratiochelins61, whose free-standing amide synthases, VibH and SchH, incorporate free norspermidine/1,3-diaminopropane into the NRPS assembly line, were reported. In this work, we verified that the C-terminal C13A*T13 domains embedded into the NRPS assembly line were essential for condensing Put with thioesterified intermediate products through in vivo and in vitro experiments. Therein, A*T13 domains may play a vital role in maintaining the correct folding of NRPS protein, and the C13 domain is more similar to the individual amide synthases in condensation function. The second histidine in the “HHxxxDG” motif also functions similarly to the typical C domain by playing a substrate positioning role (Fig. 4d, H9721A mutant vs. A12T12 mutant)56. In addition, the other representative NRPS assemble lines (Fig. 3a) possessing a C domain fixed into the C-terminus of termination module allowed us to deduce that the function of these C domains might be similar to that of amide synthases for Put introduction. The addition of polyamines into natural products could enhance bioactivity and solubility, such as the anticancer F14512 linking a spermine chain to the epipodophyllotoxin core, showing priority efficiency in the pre- and clinical trials62,63. Here we also demonstrated the remarkable feature of the Put moiety to improve the solubilities and bioactivities of glidonins, and further supported by bioengineering the lipopeptides rhizomide and holrhizin to generate new-to-nature lipopeptides with increased activities. This finding provides further insights to biologists and chemists on the modification of potential lead compounds. The optimized “Put unit” could accomplish putrescine assembly, as well as the assembly of other diamines, which provides a decent strategy for expanding the diversity of lipopeptides by bioengineering in terms of combinatorial biosynthesis. In addition, the A1 domain of gdn BGC showed good selectivity for the unusual nonproteinogenic amino acid Met(O) in vivo and in vitro, in addition to the proteinogenic amino acids Met and Leu, and can thus guide the introduction of unusual amino acids into NRPs through swapping of A domain or module to obtain diverse nonribosomal peptides. The family of linear lipopeptides glidonins with diverse fatty acid chains (C10-C14) incorporates three different first amino acids. Interestingly, a high yield of nonacylated product from lipopeptide glidonins was found in the crude extract, which was processed post-modification by the characterized acylase GdnD. The acylase GdnD is clearly encoded outside the gdn BGC and deacylates a wide variety of lipopeptides. It is possible that the deacylation step might be a global detoxification or self-resistance mechanism for the native strain DSM 7029, similar to the role of the acylase Tem25 located inside the telomycin BGC15. Currently, the mechanisms of acylases in siderophore maturation and quorum sensing have been elucidated12,14. However, the natural function of several acylases, such as GdnD and Tem25, has yet to be resolved. Lipopeptides consist of a lipid moiety linked to a linear or cyclic oligopeptide, resulting in amphiphilic properties that confer enormous functional versatility. Their natural functions, some of which may be unique to the biology of the producing microorganisms, are involved in diverse ecological roles as biosurfactants and mediators of competitive advantage in interactions with coexisting organisms, as well as in biofilm formation64,65. The lipopeptides, acylated glidonins, not only increased the biofilm formation of DSM 7029 to improve its competitive advantage but also had negative effects on its growth. To balance this contradiction, DSM 7029 chooses to silence the gdn BGC under laboratory conditions and evolve the acylase GdnD. In addition, GdnD preferentially deacylates lipopeptides with long fatty chain lengths, which also have better bioactivities. This finding expands the knowledge of the self-protection for strains to adapt to the natural competitive environment. In conclusion, the complex biosynthetic pathway of glidonin was elucidated, which starts with Cs domain to introduce fatty acids to the first amino acid, followed by condensation of the C-terminal Put by the C13 domain of module 13, forming the final lipopeptide. The elucidation of the putrescine addition mechanism and the “Put unit” swapping strategy provided further insights into the engineering of diverse NRPs with improved bioactivities by introducing a C-terminal Put tail. The structural characterization, biosynthetic machinery and bioengineering of lipopeptides with a C-terminal Put offer a versatile platform for the combinatorial biosynthesis of lipopeptides.