3. Discussion In this study, the genome of marine sponge-associated Streptomyces sp. 2-85 was found to harbor numerous unique BGCs, suggesting its potential to produce novel natural products. Co-cultivation with the fungus Cladosporium sp. 3-22 induced the production of 35 metabolites, including 19 exclusively observed in co-culture. Among them, borrelidin (compound N5) exhibited significant antifungal activity against S. parasitica, confirming its potential as a biocontrol agent. These results underscore the effectiveness of co-cultivation in generating new metabolites and the promising role of borrelidin in combating aquatic pathogens. Streptomyces is known for its rich potential in natural product biosynthesis, typically harboring around 30 BGCs per genome [26]. Streptomyces sp. 2-85 stands out with 31 BGCs, indicating diverse secondary metabolite production, of which nearly 30% exhibited low similarities with annotated sequences, suggesting the presence of unknown metabolic pathways. Further exploration is crucial for uncovering novel bioactive compounds. The integration of genome mining, metabolomics, and co-culture of Streptomyces with other bacteria and fungi has been employed as an effective strategy to activate silent BGCs and discover novel bioactive secondary metabolites from marine sponges [27]. Competitive interactions between strains in co-cultures often enhance product yield or trigger the production of specific defensive metabolites. Recent studies have shown that Streptomyces-Fungi interactions can activate the BGCs of Streptomyces, yielding novel natural products [28]. In this study, compound N5 and its derivatives, including compounds N1, N2, N4, N6, and N10, showed increased yields during co-culture, probably due to the mutual competition for nutrients or space. The Streptomyces-Fungi interaction also activated the borrelidin gene cluster, which might also trigger the expression of silent hydrolase genes, leading to lactone hydrolysis and the production of N1, N2, N4, N6, and N10. Similarly, unique fungal-bacterial interactions induce the production of fungal secondary metabolites, which have been confirmed at the molecular level. For example, the co-culture of Aspergillus fumigatus with the inducing strain Streptomyces rapamycinicus stimulated the production of fungal secondary metabolites fumicyclines A and B through histone modification [29]. The significant increase in fungal compound 21 production during co-culture may be related to such specific activation. Overall, Streptomyces serve as both inducers and participants in compound production during co-culture with fungi. In some cases, Streptomyces can trigger epigenetic modifications in fungi, resulting in complex secondary metabolic changes, while fungi can produce specific secondary metabolites that affect the secondary metabolism of Streptomyces. Borrelidin was initially discovered in Streptomyces rochei isolated from soil samples and was found to exhibit anti-spirochetal activity [18]. Shi et al. first described the anti-oomycete activity of borrelidin against various phytopathogenic oomycetes, including Pythium aphanidermatum, P. splendens, P. sylvaticum, P. ultimum, and P. capsica [30]. Liu et al. also found borrelidin to display potent antibacterial activity against eight species of Phytophthora sojae, surpassing the commercial fungicide metalaxyl [31]. Despite borrelidin has previously shown antifungal and anti-oomycete activity, this study is the first to demonstrate its ability to inhibit the mycelial growth and spore germination of the aquatic pathogen S. parasitica. The compound targets threonyl-tRNA synthetase, consistent with previous studies suggesting its potential as a biocontrol agent for harmful aquatic pathogens [25]. Previous studies indicated that borrelidin is composed of nine ketone units [32], theoretically requiring eight extension steps, but the analysis of the composition and function of the gene cluster related to compound N5 in this strain revealed only six extension modules, suggesting that two condensation steps containing malonyl-CoA units could not be identified. This may imply that the synthetic pathway of borrelidin may be more complex than previously expected or that other unknown synthetic pathways may exist in this strain to complete these missing steps. In addition to highlighting the potent anti-S. parasitic activity of compound N5, this study also provides a series of candidate molecules for further investigation to identify other bioactive metabolites produced during the co-culture process. Optimum fermentation conditions were observed at PDB pH 7.0, inducing the production of metabolites, including sesquiterpenes, macrolides, polyketides, and amino acid derivatives, of which 9 metabolites were significantly increased. However, only borrelidin was detected in the extract, which was different from the predicted metabolites of the genome. This suggests that further optimization of co-culture conditions is needed to explore more compounds. We also detected the presence of borrelidin in the genome of Streptomyces rochei JK1 (CP121271.1), which shares high 16S rRNA gene homology (99.5%) with Streptomyces sp. 2-85, implying that this compound could be an important component of closely related strains.