DISCUSSION Zeamines are phytotoxins produced by the phytopathogen D. oryzae that play vital roles as key virulence determinants in bacterial pathogenesis (Cheng et al., 2013; Zhou et al., 2011). In addition, these polyamine compounds are also potent antibiotics against fungi, nematodes, and a range of bacterial pathogens (Hellberg et al., 2015; Liao et al., 2015; Masschelein, Clauwers, Awodi et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2010). The zeamine producer D. oryzae presents a remarkable higher level of zeamine resistance than a range of bacterial pathogens (Liang et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2010). Obviously, such a superior self‐protection mechanism would be of critical importance for the bacterium to become a formidable pathogen and habitat dominator, as it allows the bacteria to produce sufficient phytotoxins/antibiotics to compete against the host and other microorganisms. In this study, we documented a new zeamine resistance mechanism encoded by the arn
EC1 operon that confers on D. oryzae an ability to protect itself against the toxicity of zeamines. Inactivation of the arn
EC1 operon genes drastically decreased D. oryzae EC1 resistance to zeamines (Table 1). In addition, significantly, we found that the arn
EC1 genes also play roles in modulation of CPS production (Figures 4a and S2), cell division (Figure 6), and bacterial growth (Figure 5a), thus influencing certain virulence‐related traits, including motility (Figure 5b), biofilm formation (Figure 4b), and pathogenesis (Figure 3). This study thus deciphers a new zeamine resistance mechanism and expands our understanding on the biological roles and significance of the ArnEC1 system in microbial pathogens. The arn operon is known for its role in bacterial resistance against CAMPs such as polymyxin B (Gunn et al., 2000; Jiang et al., 2010; Lin et al., 2014; McPhee et al., 2003; Winfield et al., 2005). The operon contains seven genes encoding the enzymes for modification of bacterial outer membrane LPS with the cationic l‐Ara4N moiety, which reduces the net negative charge of LPS and limits the binding, accumulation, and permeation of CAMPs (Yan et al., 2007). Among these seven genes, arnA encodes a decarboxylase/UDP‐4‐amino‐4‐deoxy‐l‐arabinose formyltransferase catalysing the first reaction step for the biosynthesis of UDP‐4‐ketopentose from UDP‐glucuronic acid. A UDP‐4‐amino‐4‐deoxy‐l‐arabinose‐oxoglutarate aminotransferase encoded by arnB converts UDP‐4‐ketopentose to UDP‐β‐l‐Ara4N at the second reaction step. At the third reaction step, an undecaprenyl phosphate‐4‐deoxy‐4‐formamido‐l‐arabinose transferase encoded by arnC transfers 4‐deoxy‐4‐formamido‐l‐arabinose from UDP to undecaprenyl phosphate for ArnD deformylation to form undecaprenyl phosphate‐α‐l‐Ara4N. The undecaprenyl phosphate‐α‐l‐Ara4N may be transported from the inner membrane to the outer membrane by two l‐Ara4N‐phosphoundecaprenol flippase subunits, ArnE and ArnF. At the last step, an undecaprenyl phosphate‐α‐4‐amino‐4‐deoxy‐l‐arabinose arabinosyl transferase encoded by arnT transfers l‐Ara4N from undecaprenyl phosphate‐α‐l‐Ara4N to lipid A (Breazeale et al., 2005; Trent et al., 2001; Yan et al., 2007). Bioinformatics analysis showed that the ArnEC1 enzymes are highly similar to the well‐characterized Arn homologues in S. enterica, P. aeruginosa, and D. dadantii with an amino acid similarity of over 57% (Table 1) and proposed conserved functions. MIC assay results unveiled the involvement of arn
EC1 genes in Dickeya tolerance against zeamines and polymyxin B (Table 1). Similar to polymyxin B, zeamines also contain positive charged amino groups and act by damaging the cell envelope of gram‐negative bacteria (Masschelein, Clauwers, Stalmans, et al., 2015), implying that addition of the l‐Ara4N moiety in LPS by the ArnEC1 system could reduce the chance of zeamines damaging the bacterial cell membrane. In addition, we found that the ArnEC1 system plays an essential role in D. oryzae biofilm formation, which is a well‐established antimicrobial and stress tolerance mechanism (Flemming et al., 2016). A previous study showed that inactivation of an arnA
EC1 homologue, pmrI, led to partially decreased biofilm formation in P. mirabilis (Jiang et al., 2010). In the present study, we found that biofilm formation in the arn
EC1 deletion mutants of D. oryzae was almost completely abolished (Figure 4b). Previous studies underlined the positive contributions of LPS to two key steps of biofilm formation, namely, bacterial initial attachment and adhesion to the abiotic surface (Ruhal & Kataria, 2021), and a general negative impact of CPS overproduction on biofilm formation (Limoli et al., 2015). As inactivation of the cps1 gene did not restore biofilm formation in arn
EC1 mutants, we proposed the complete abolishment of biofilm formation resulted from the negative impact of LPS changes after inactivation of arn
EC1 genes, but not a general negative influence of CPS overproduction caused by inactivation of arn
EC1 genes. Taken together, we conclude that the ArnEC1 system confers zeamine and CAMP resistance through modification of LPS and facilitation of biofilm formation in D. oryzae EC1. We recently reported that the RND efflux pump DesABC is involved in zeamine resistance (Liang et al., 2019). Interestingly, null mutation of the DesABC pump in D. oryzae EC1 causes an about eightfold decrease in zeamine resistance (Liang et al., 2019). In addition, transcriptional expression of desAB is inducible and triggered by exogenous addition of zeamines but not polymyxin B (Liang et al., 2019). In contrast, however, transcriptional expression of the arn
EC1 genes appeared to be cell density‐dependent and was not affected by zeamines (Figure 2a–c), and deletion of arn
EC1 genes caused a more severe loss of resistance to polymyxin B than to zeamines (Table 1). These findings suggest that DesABC is a zeamine‐specific resistance mechanism, whereas ArnEC1 is more likely a broad‐spectrum resistance mechanism against various CAMPs produced by the hosts and the competitors of D. oryzae in the environment. Such high expression of the ArnEC1 system at the early bacterial growth stage may facilitate D. oryzae survival upon exposure to CAMPs from the hosts and in the presence of competitors of D. oryzae when zeamines are not highly produced and accumulated for competition in the environment. Importantly, we found that simultaneous knockdown of arnB
EC1 and desB decreased the zeamine resistance of D. oryzae EC1 to a level similar to that of the zeamine‐sensitive E. coli DH5α (Table 1), indicating that the DesABC efflux pump and the ArnEC1 LPS modification system are the predominant self‐protection mechanisms of D. oryzae against its self‐produced toxic zeamines. In addition to validation of the role of the ArnEC1 LPS system in CAMP resistance and biofilm formation (Figure 4b, Table 1), which have been documented in other bacterial species as well (Gunn et al., 2000; Jiang et al., 2010), interestingly, the results from this study unveiled several new biological functions associated with the ArnEC1 system or its components. Transcriptomics analysis performed between the wild‐type strain EC1 and the arnB
EC1 mutant not only suggested the bacterial growth and virulence conferred by ArnBEC1 are associated with the contribution of ArnBEC1 to the regulation of the expression of hundreds of genes in D. oryzae, especially those belonging to ribosome, carbon metabolism, and oxidative phosphorylation pathways, but also unveiled the similarities and dissimilarities of ArnEC1 components in regulating biological functions. Firstly, ArnBCATEC1 have similar roles in conferring a nonmucoid phenotype through repressing CPS genes. Transcriptomics analysis results unveiled that inactivation of arnB
EC1 resulted in overexpression of CPS genes (Table S4), which subsequently led to the finding that ArnCATEC1 also influenced the conversion between mucoid and nonmucoid phenotypes through modulation of CPS gene expression (Figures 4a, 7b, and S2). Notably, ArnDEC1 plays a dissimilar role in conferring the bacterial nonmucoid morphotype. Inactivation of arnD
EC1 up‐regulated CPS gene expression (Figure 7b), but this did not result in a mucoid phenotype as inactivation of the arnBCAT
EC1 genes (Figure 4). We proposed that in addition to a similar role in the regulation of CPS gene expression, ArnDEC1 may play additional roles in modulating metabolic pathways required for the biosynthesis of CPS components. This was evident as ArnDEC1 had a higher contribution to bacterial growth than other ArnEC1 components (Figure 5a). Such multifaceted impact of ArnDEC1 on bacterial metabolism may lead to the difference between ArnDEC1 and other ArnEC1 components in regulating the conversion between mucoid and nonmucoid phenotypes. Secondly, it is intriguing to find that although ArnBEC1 and ArnDEC1 have regulatory roles in bacterial growth and swimming motility, ArnBEC1 and ArnDEC1 have distinct regulatory mechanisms. Transcriptomics analysis results unveiled that ArnBEC1 induces the expression of S10 ribosomal genes, whose counterparts in E. coli and B. subtilis are involved in bacterial growth, cell division, and swimming motility (Klitgaard et al., 2015; Suzuki et al., 2014; Takada et al., 2014; Zouine et al., 2000). However, unlike ArnBEC1, ArnDEC1 did not play a significant role in inducing the expression of S10 ribosomal genes and a process associated with ribosomal protein production, that is, RNA biosynthesis (Figure 7d,e). We proposed these observations may result from the fact that ArnBEC1 and ArnDEC1 have different substrate specificity, as ArnBEC1 is a proposed putative UDP‐4‐amino‐4‐deoxy‐l‐arabinose‐oxoglutarate aminotransferase, whereas ArnDEC1 is a proposed 4‐deoxy‐4‐formamido‐l‐arabinose‐phosphoundecaprenol deformylase. Although the mechanisms of action of ArnBEC1 and ArnDEC1 are still unclear, studies of the biological functions of arnB
EC1 and arnD
EC1 mutants provided useful clues on how ArnBEC1 and ArnDEC1 affect the virulence of D. oryzae. The present study demonstrated the roles of ArnBEC1 and ArnDEC1 in the regulation of swimming motility and bacterial growth (Figure 5). Bacterial motility is one of the key virulence determinants of D. oryzae that plays important roles in bacterial invasion and systemic infection (Chen et al., 2020, 2022; Hussain et al., 2008; Lv et al., 2018, 2022; Shi et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2016). It seems rational that the larger contributions of ArnBEC1 and ArnDEC1 than other ArnEC1 components to D. oryzae virulence resulted from the positive regulation of swimming motility by ArnBEC1 and ArnDEC1. Given that ArnBEC1 and ArnDEC1 have different regulatory roles in cell division, expression of S10 ribosomal genes, and RNA synthesis (Figures 6 and 7d,e), we proposed the contributions of ArnBEC1 and ArnDEC1 to D. oryzae virulence are redundant. In summary, this study unveils a new zeamine resistance mechanism mediated by the ArnEC1 LPS modification system in D. oryzae EC1; this mechanism and the previously identified DesABC efflux pump constitute the foremost resistance mechanisms against zeamines. These findings improve our understanding of how D. oryzae could safeguard itself while producing formidable toxic molecules to infect host organisms and attack its potential competitors and may facilitate engineering of D. oryzae strains able to overproduce this family of potent antimicrobial compounds. In addition, importantly, characterization of the ArnEC1 system led to the discovery of new roles of the ArnEC1 system and its components in bacterial physiology and virulence, which provide not only valuable insight into the biological functions of the widely conserved Arn system, but also useful clues for further elucidating the complicated and sophisticated regulatory mechanisms that govern bacterial physiology and virulence.