DISCUSSION Our data show that the transcription of BGCs in Sorangium sp. is determined by bacterial growth. In a batch culture, the transcription level of most BGC core genes (PKSs and NRPSs in particular) was maximal during exponential growth, when the cellular metabolism was simultaneously engaged in the synthesis of cell wall components, proteins and nucleic acids, and in trans‐membrane transport activities (as indicated by the functional analysis of genome‐wide transcription patterns). As soon as bacterial growth ceased and the culture reached the stationary phase, BGC transcription quickly levelled off. Strikingly, transcriptional bursting of BGC core genes appeared to directly determine the net synthesis rates of the NRP/PK‐hybrids epothilone A and icumazole A. Such a correlation between natural compound synthesis and BGC transcription explains the success of previous attempts to boost compound production by increasing the level of transcription (Peng et al., 2018; Rachid et al., 2007, 2009; Ye et al., 2019). This result also suggests that biosynthesis proteins may get degraded (Trötschel et al., 2013) or their activities downregulated during later growth stages, which coincides with the observation of increased transcriptional activities of genes involved with protein modification and turnover in the early stationary phase. The close association between BGC transcription and compound production observed here for a wild‐type Sorangium strain warrants efforts towards developing improved genetic engineering tools for this organism, since the molecular manipulation of transcriptional regulation may be a viable strategy for improving compound yields. Of note, absolute transcription levels varied widely between BGCs, including those for epothilone and icumazole. It is currently unknown which level of BGC transcription may be required for natural compound production. Our results indicate that the transcription level may vary over several orders of magnitude among active BGCs, even within a single genome, suggesting it may be difficult to find any universal threshold for transcription above which the production of detectable amounts of natural compounds could reliably be predicted (Mungan et al., 2022). Our data also show that BGC read counts at single time points may provide limited information about compound synthesis. Rather, time course data were required to resolve the transcriptional bursts that were accompanied by increased rates of compound production in Sorangium sp. One limitation of our analysis is that it relied on measurements of net production rates of compounds from the bulk of the bacterial culture, whereas we could not directly assess the underlying synthesis rates within bacterial cells. Decay of icumazole A clearly dominated over its synthesis during the late stages of the batch culture, but it is unknown whether the compound was equally unstable while the bacteria were growing or whether it was actively degraded. Hence, the measured net production rates likely resulted from both synthesis and concomitant degradation, adding complexity to understanding their genetic regulation. Arguably however, the net production rate is the most relevant measure for biotechnology. Core biosynthesis genes from 48 BGCs (out of 52 BGCs in total) in Sorangium sp. So ce836 were differentially expressed over our time‐course experiment, that is their transcription levels varied significantly over time. Moreover, this was true for all core genes of the majority of BGCs, and their temporal transcription patterns were largely synchronous within BGCs. These results indicate that the majority of BGCs in the genome were transcriptionally active, even though we had applied only a single cultivation condition. This observation contradicts the assumption of widespread transcriptional silence of BGCs in laboratory cultures (Okada & Seyedsayamdost, 2017). Similarly, an earlier investigation applying microarray and proteome analyses had demonstrated that the majority of BGCs in an M. xanthus culture were expressed (Bode et al., 2009; Schley et al., 2006), and hence, this may be a common pattern in myxobacteria. Note, however, that our present study provides rich insights into genome‐wide temporal patterns of gene activity that were not resolved previously on the basis of microarray hybridization or quantitative PCR (Bode et al., 2009). Generally, the temporal dynamics of BGC transcription, translation, and natural compound assembly in bacteria are poorly understood (Machado et al., 2017). Following the transcription of BGC genes, the synthesis of natural compounds may be regulated at the translational or posttranslational levels, or limited by the supply of building blocks, cofactors, or energy (Wenzel & Müller, 2009). It must also be taken into consideration that an observed discrepancy between the genomic endowment with biosynthetic genes and the yield of natural compounds may be caused by limitations of the techniques for metabolite extraction and analysis (Amos et al., 2017; Panter et al., 2021). Due to the inherent complexity of metabolome data, it is generally challenging to discover unknown natural compounds and associate them with their BGCs (Panter et al., 2021). However, if the net cellular production of natural compounds is correlated with BGC transcription also in other cases similar to epothilone and icumazole, we suggest that temporal transcriptome patterns may provide useful criteria for filtering of time‐resolved metabolome data. Our observation of high natural compound production rates in growing myxobacterial cells challenges the frequently cited notion of preferred BGC expression during late bacterial growth phases, which is based on observations on Streptomyces spp. and other actinobacteria (van der Heul et al., 2018; van Wezel & McDowall, 2011; Wohlleben et al., 2017). It suggests that adjusted batch runtimes, product retention approaches, or even continuous fermentation might offer the potential for maximization of biotechnological product yields from myxobacteria (Frykman et al., 2005). Diverse temporal transcription patterns of BGCs in So ce836 suggested their independent regulation, probably reflecting different roles of associated compounds. Myxobacterial formation of fruiting bodies usually occurs in older cultures and is thought to be triggered by starvation (Muñoz‐Dorado et al., 2019). Therefore, preferred BGC transcription during maximum bacterial growth seemed to restrict any direct roles of associated natural compounds in fruiting body formation, even though our experiments with agitated liquid cultures were not ideal to investigate this process. Generally, the physiological and ecological roles of microbial natural compounds are very little understood (Phillips et al., 2022; Schmidt et al., 2019), and time‐resolved investigations of their biosynthesis and its regulation may provide valuable insights into associations of these molecules with the producer's cellular processes or interactions with other organisms. To our knowledge, our study for the first time relates the temporal dynamics of BGC expression to patterns of genome‐wide transcription in any myxobacterium. A more detailed understanding of the diversity of BGC expression and regulation will facilitate the discovery of novel natural compounds, the induction of their synthesis, and the optimization of their large‐scale production.