Discussion First Assembled Genomes of Tonnoidea and Muricoidea The present work is a significant addition to the genome data available to date for Neogastropoda and Caenogastropoda. These previously included only eight neogastropod species, six of which belonging to Conoidea and two to Buccinoidea superfamily, and six caenogastropod species, four of which from a same family, the Ampullariidae (supplementary table S1, Supplementary Material online). Here, we added two genomes, one from the Muricidae family (Neogastropoda) and one for the Tonnoidea superfamily (Littorinimorpha), closely related to neogastropods (Lemarcis et al. 2022), thus broadening the taxonomic span of the available genomes. With the further addition of the recently sequenced genome of C. ventricosus (Pardos-Blas et al. 2021), we can now rely on reference genomes that effectively represent the diversity of predatory gastropods and remarkably expand the available molecular databases. Furthermore, these genomes were assembled at a chromosomal level with high BUSCO scores and thus constitute valuable assets to reconstruct evolutionary processes and patterns at the genomic level. In addition to the high genome assembly quality, gene annotations provide a reliable nearly complete dataset of genes, whose completeness is comparable with available data on the Ampullarioidea superfamily (see annotation BUSCO score, table 1 and supplementary table S1, Supplementary Material online). General features of these two new genomes do not significantly differ from previously published neogastropods genomes, even though more genes were found, likely as a consequence of the higher quality of the sequencing (fewer base errors). Although gene numbers were 1.8–2 times higher in our two genomes than in Ampullarioidea genomes, almost twice less exons were found per CDS, with a length 1.5 times shorter, indicating a tendency to favor smaller genes in Caenogastropoda, a feature potentially associated to an increased transcription and expression frequency (Lopes et al. 2021). The overall sizes of our newly sequenced genomes were five to six times larger than Ampullarioidea genomes; this observation, coupled with the fact that more than twice pseudochromosomes were detected, strongly implies the occurrence of a WGD event. Together with the proliferation of repeated elements observed in the newly sequenced genomes (from 11% in P. canaliculata to 60% and 40% in M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma), these processes may have considerably increased genetic variation and diversity of gene expression regulation patterns in these species. WGD in Neogastropoda and Tonnoidea WGD is an important evolutionary event where all chromosomes are doubled in a genome. It provides increased opportunities for rearrangement, deletion, and insertion events that could contribute to evolvability, the capacity of species to adapt to different environments and diversify (Phuong et al. 2019), ultimately leading to the emergence of adaptive evolutionary novelties (Flagel and Wendel 2009; Van de Peer et al. 2009). Indeed, WGDs have been detected in many species-rich lineages, including, for example teleost fishes (Glasauer and Neuhauss 2014) and orchids (Moriyama and Koshiba-Takeuchi 2018), to name only few of them. In caenogastropods, karyotype analyses have been carried out on several individual species, providing data for a subsequent study that predicted a WGD event in Neogastropoda, Tonnoidea, Cypraeidae, and Capulidae based on genome size and chromosome counts (Hallinan and Lindberg 2011). WGD has been subsequently confirmed in C. ventricosus (Pardos-Blas et al. 2021), based on the detection of synteny and colinear blocks, the distribution of Ks peak, and the duplication of Hox gene clusters. Other WGD events were described in gastropods within the Heterobranchia subclass, as for example in A. immaculata and A. fulica (Liu et al. 2021), each possessing 31 chromosomes. In this work, we detected synteny between the different species (fig. 2), and the comparison with P. canaliculata showed a doubling (or sometimes quadrupling) of the pseudochromosome number in each of our target species. Having more than two copies of a chromosome raises the question of multiple WGD, but it can also be explained by duplication events limited to some chromosomes only. To clarify this issue, genome comparison between more species within neogastropods and in closely related caenogastropods like, for example Tonnoidea, Calyptraeidae, or Cypraeidae families (Lemarcis et al. 2022), would be needed. In addition, the exact timing of the WGD event remains to be determined. Our data suggest that the WGD event took place at least prior to the divergence of the Tonnoidea + Neogastropoda lineage (Lemarcis et al 2022) from the rest of the Caenogastropoda. However, according to the hypothesis proposed by Hallinan and Lindberg (2011), the WGD event may have also affected Cypraeidae and Capulidae, implying that it could have occurred earlier in the evolutionary history of Caenogastropoda, if confirmed in other lineages potentially closely related to neogastropods such as Calyptraeoidea and Velutinoidea. Although sequencing the genomes for the missing lineages would provide valuable insights going well beyond the scope of this work, such an endeavor would be highly costly and time consuming, given the high species diversity of the group; an estimation of their chromosome number and/or genome size could be a more affordable approach to determine the origin and nature of this WGD (Hallinan and Lindberg 2011). The occurrence of syntenic blocks between the analyzed species (M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma) and P. canaliculata, the Ks distribution, and the duplication of Hox genes found within the species we analyzed strongly suggest WGD, with the same evidences found in Achatina species and C. ventricosus (Liu et al. 2020; Pardos-Blas et al. 2021). Although the first higher peak of the Ks distribution would correspond to the newly duplicated genes within each species, the second smaller peak would correspond to a WGD in neogastropods and tonnoideans, whereas the third peak would correspond to divergence between neogastropods, Tonnoidea, and the other caenogastropods. Hox clusters were found in both M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma, and both showed a duplication in the pseudochromosomes found to be homologs with those of P. canaliculata. In those clusters, we can identify some differences, possibly due to rearrangements, deletions, and/or insertions. All these evidences confirm the WGD event previously suggested (Bose et al. 2017; Pardos-Blas et al. 2021) in neogastropods and in the Tonnoidea, for which data concerning karyotypes or genome sequencing were completely lacking until the present study. The presence of only few colinear blocks within M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma (supplementary fig. S2, Supplementary Material online), in opposition of what was found in Achatina, strongly suggests a major role for other evolutionary events after the WGD. Indeed, genomic doubling would imply failure of cell division; thus, interchromosomal rearrangements are suggested to be the most frequent events after a WGD (Otto and Whitton 2000). Additionally, a WGD implies the retention of two copies of a gene or a repertoire of genes (Sémon and Wolfe 2007) which could lead to neofunctionalization and subfunctionalization events, as it has been reported in plants (He and Zhang 2005). When a gene is duplicated, one of the copies can acquire a new function (neofunctionalization), retain a subset of the original gene’s functions (subfunctionalization), or degenerate to the point of losing its function (nonfunctionalization) (Force et al. 1999; Kuzmin et al. 2022). Gene expression analysis (Pasquier et al. 2017), structural analysis (Voordeckers et al. 2012), or experimental manipulation (Hittinger and Carroll 2007) can be applied to determine whether gene duplicates have undergone subfunctionalization, neofunctionalization, or nonfunctionalization. Since it is still a challenge to maintain neogastropods alive in the laboratory and available data are too limited to reliably predict protein structure in such nonmodel organisms, we focused on gene expression in two available tissues from S. haemastoma to gain insights on the fate of duplicated genes, the salivary glands (which are often involved in venom secretion, (Ponte and Modica 2017), and the osphradium, a sensory organ located in the molluscan mantle (Lindberg and Sigwart 2015). However, as synteny was rarely conserved between the homologous chromosomes within a given species, in most cases we were not able to detect the second copy of a gene, suggesting that the copy diverged enough to be detectable or has been depleted and lost its function, which is the most common event after WGD (Pasquier et al. 2017). Nonetheless, when the two copies were detected, most of the ohnologs that were found differentially expressed in the salivary gland compared with the osphradium had similar expression patterns. Whether these similar expression profiles correspond to sub- or neofunctionalization would require expression data from species that diverged before the WGD event, as described in snakes, whose venom evolution occurred through gene duplication and subfunctionalization of genes encoding salivary proteins (Hargreaves et al. 2014). Furthermore, our gene expression analyses were limited to two tissues, whereas expression profiles in a wide range of tissues and/or different developmental stages would be needed to fully understand how expression patterns of ohnologs are correlated. Future studies would ideally include structural characterization of proteins produced by each gene copy and functional assays to test for differences in their biological activity. Such a multidisciplinary approach would provide a more comprehensive understanding of the roles and functions of the duplicated genes in the organism. Toxin Evolution Toxins are peptides or proteins, produced or stored by an organism, which interfere with physiological or biochemical processes in another organism (Olivera et al. 2015; Arbuckle 2018). They were found to be produced by multiple species across the eukaryote kingdom (Casewell et al. 2013; Fry et al. 2015) and were known to serve multiple functions. In this work, we were attentive to find putative toxin candidates in both M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma. Multiple hits of toxins or related genes were found in both genomes. Among these genes, at least one group of genes (group 1) was found closely related to a conotoxin (fig. 5B), in both M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma; its occurrence was also reported in another neogastropod species belonging to the genus Vexillum (Costellariidae; Kuznetsova et al. 2022). This finding might indeed suggest that the appearance of conotoxin-related peptide could be a shared evolutionary novelty of predatory gastropods, predating the recruitment of such toxins before the origin of Conoidea, where they might indeed have gone through multiple duplication-neofunctionalization rounds to attain the observed diversity. More studies are needed also in other neogastropods (and related predatory marine snails) to confirm that the capacity to produce toxins is not a key innovation limited to cone snails or conoideans, as traditionally seen, but can be extended to the whole neogastropods (and close relatives) making them one of the most, if not the most, diverse group of venomous animals on Earth. As we focused only on genes found in syntenic blocks, it should be noted that our findings constitute a limited and preliminary assessment of toxin repertoire in M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma. Moreover, our analysis was based on sequence similarity of toxin databases against the genomes and gene expression in S. haemastoma, but gene expression studies and proteomic analyses are needed in order to confirm their expression in secretory organs used in prey capture. Our DEG analysis actually suggests that many genes are up or down-regulated in the salivary glands that are involved in toxin production (Ponte and Modica 2017). Furthermore, the functions of these genes related to conotoxins, toxins, and related genes found in M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma are yet to be confirmed by testing their potential functions in vitro or in vivo. Nonetheless, identifying such sequences in the genome helps in understanding their evolutionary origin and history. Interestingly, the toxin genes on which we focused all had sequence similarities with P. canaliculata, the apple snail. This freshwater snail is extremely polyphagous, feeding mostly on vegetal material (Estebenet and Martin 2002) but no evidences indicate a possible toxin production. Thus, it is likely that these genes encode for proteins having other functions in P. canaliculata, and their duplication during the WGD followed by neofunctionalization events led to the apparition of new functions, including toxins. Duplication events, followed by sub and/or neofunctionalization, has been proposed as the main mechanism driving the evolution of venom genes in different clades, including spiders (Haney et al. 2016), snakes (Hargreaves et al. 2014; Giorgianni et al. 2020), and cone snails (Duda and Palumbi 1999; Chang and Duda 2012), especially in presence of positive selective forces (Kordiš and Gubenšek 2000). Growing evidence support the hypothesis of a relationship between WGD events and the emergence of evolutionary novelties, despite other factors, such as local duplications (Zhang et al. 1998) and co-option of single genes (Martinson et al. 2017), might be involved in the onset of adaptive traits. It has been argued that the ability of WGD to convey selective advantages and drive the appearance of evolutionary novelties would only emerge in presence of drastic environmental changes, remodeling ecological communities and increasing the availability of new niches (Moriyama and Koshiba-Takeuchi 2018). Indeed, in amphibian genomes, a potential correlation between WGD, adaptive radiation, and the well-known mass extinction event at the K-Pg boundary has been reported (Mable et al. 2011). In fishes and plants genomes, WGD that could have predated adaptive radiation could have been triggered by subsequent environmental changes, as proposed in the “WGD radiation lag-time model” (Eric Schranz et al. 2012). Interestingly, fossil data strongly suggest that the emergence of Neogastropoda and carnivorous caenogastropods, and their rapid radiation, could be placed in the context of the major reorganization of the benthic marine communities known as the Mesozoic marine revolution (Vermeij 1977; Bouchet et al. 2002; Harper 2003), where the evolutionary potential offered by the WGD could have been adaptive to fully exploit novel niches. Expanding genomic characterization to a broader array of taxa within the caenogastropods could help shedding light into the role of WGD and major genomic rearrangements in the origin of hyperdiverse groups.