Discussion Prevalence and hosts of the “classical” clinical dfrB gene variants Our data suggest that treated wastewater is a primary source of the “classical” variants of dfrB with numeric indices in the range of 1–5 but also 7, which comprise the earliest dfrB identified [29, 50, 51]. The relative abundance in wastewater-borne metagenomes was significantly increased for all of those variants as compared to freshwater-borne metagenomes. Some of the variants (dfrB5, dfrB7) were exclusively recovered from wastewater samples, a fact that should not be overinterpreted, however, considering the limited sensitivity of metagenomics as compared to PCR in the detection of low abundance genes [52]. Overall, the analyzed dataset supports the notion that the classical variants of dfrB are primarily harbored by human gut-associated bacteria. In correlation analysis, members of the phylum γ-Proteobacteria, including, for example, Aeromonadales and Pseudomonadales, emerged as the most likely candidate host of one of the gene variants, dfrB3. As usual, however, correlation provides indications rather than rigorous evidence. In particular, the identification of definite candidate hosts is naturally limited by collinearities, arising from the natural structure of microbial communities. The sharing of common niches or the formation of metabolic networks, for example, inevitably lead to substantial correlations between distinct bacterial groups which may not be disentangled in host identification analysis. Nevertheless, the proposed primary association of the classical dfrB variants with γ-Proteobacteria is very plausible, as it perfectly agrees with the outcome of whole genome-based studies [28]. In the analysis of the original short read data, most of the classical dfrB variants, especially dfrB1, dfrB3, and dfrB4, were also found in direct proximity to other ARGs (Table 3). Considering the type of the linked ARGs, our findings corroborate the outcome of earlier WGS-based studies according to which the earliest reported dfrB genes are mostly (but not exclusively) associated with genes mediating resistance to aminoglycosides [28, 53]. In this respect, these dfrB variants are similar to genes of the dfrA family. The rare linkage of dfrB with genes mediating resistance to phenicol, betalactam (blaOXA), and rifampicin (arr) found in the analyzed metagenomes is also consistent with former WGS-based findings [28]. The direct neighborship of dfrB1 to dfrB7 to other ARGs was further confirmed by the evaluation of the assembled flanking regions. In addition to enzymes providing resistance against aminoglycosides and betalactams, multi-drug efflux pumps were frequently detected in proximity to the dihydrofolate reductases (Table 4). The frequent co-occurrence of the classical dfrB variants with other ARGs suggests that a notable percentage of the gene copies is embedded in resistance cassette arrays as has been demonstrated by WGS analysis [28, 29, 53]. It can further be hypothesized that the respective dfrB genes are potentially part of mobile genetic elements like integrons and transposons facilitating their proliferation, including plasmid-based horizontal transfer. The alignment of dfrB-positive short reads against integron and insertion sequences databases strongly supports this hypothesis of mobility. Specifically, all of the 90 cases where a dfrB gene was found in direct proximity to an insertion sequence, most typically TnAs3, were attributable to the gene variants dfrB1 to dfrB7 (Table S6). Similarly, integron signatures were almost exclusively found in neighborship with these wastewater associated dfrB variants (Tables 4 and S5). Occurrence of recently discovered dfrB genes The recently described gene variants, especially dfrB9 to dfrB21, were discovered in a heterogeneous set of sequences comprising both bacterial isolate genomes [28] and metagenomes of environmental origin [30]. However, owing to the limited number of dfrB-positive sequences studied so far, it was previously impossible to infer quantitative information on the occurrence and distribution of these gene variants. Based on consistently processed metagenomic datasets, our study provides quantitative information on the abundance of dfrB9 to dfrB21 in complex environmental communities, which is a key to uncovering possible anthropogenic impacts. According to our analysis, the variants dfrB9, dfrB10, dfrB13, and dfrB14 were shown to be significantly more prevalent in freshwater environments than in wastewater. Hence, very likely, these gene variants are primarily hosted by environmental bacteria which do not play a predominant role in municipal wastewater systems. This finding is consistent with the observation that many of the genes mediating clinically relevant antibiotic resistance have their origin in environmental bacteria [54] which has now been confirmed for a broad variety of genes and hosts [55–57]. However, the original role of many ancestral antibiotic resistance genes is still unknown and different factors may have shaped their evolution in environmental bacteria [58, 59]. From the anthropocentric perspective, the resistance trait is often at the center of interest and the presence of ARGs in antibiotic producers or their interspecific competitors is indeed expected from an ecological point of view. However, in the particular case of TMP, no natural analogues are known to date. Hence, the original selective advantage associated with environmental dfrB genes like, for instance, dfrB9 and dfrB10 is unrelated to self-resistance or microbial chemical warfare. The ecological advantage leading to the maintenance of these genes is yet to be identified. For example, the encoded DfrB could exhibit a favorable metabolic costs profile in the host compared to alternatives dihydrofolate reductases like the ubiquitous FolA. However, the dfrB genes could also be subject to selection by yet unknown factors unrelated to dihydrofolate reduction. So far, information on actual bacterial hosts of dfrB genes is largely confined to the variants dfrB1 to dfrB5 and mostly pertains to genomes of human-related isolates [28]. The variant dfrB10 was originally discovered in a typical soil bacterium, Pseudomonas putida, involved in the infection of a patient in China [60]. Beyond that, we are not aware of successful attempts to disclose the bacterial hosts of, for example, dfrB9 to dfrB21 in environmental communities which inspired us to screen for statistical correlations between dfrB abundance and community composition. However, even the most prominent environmental gene variant in our data set, dfrB10, was not significantly associated with any bacterial order such that no host candidates could be identified. This could reflect the presence of dfrB10 in a variety of species due to horizontal transfer of, for example, plasmid-borne instances or the conservation over a long evolutionary history. However, a lack of close statistical associations would also be observed if dfrB10 was actually linked to a primary host which is just too rare to be adequately represented in communities inferred from amplification-free shotgun metagenomics. According to our analyses, the genetic context of the recently described dfrB genes appears to deviate substantially from the one identified for dfrB1 to dfrB7. For example, none of the sequences hosting dfrB9 to dfrB21 was associated to insertion sequences, neither in the analysis of short reads, nor in the evaluation of assembled flanks. Similarly, according to our data set, genotypic multiple-resistance involving dfrB9 to dfrB21 appears to be a rare exception as it was observed in a single metagenome only where, as opposed to the general trend, dfrB10 was recovered from a wastewater sample. These findings agree with genetic context analyses of environmental sequences in which dfrB11 to dfrB21 were originally identified [30]. We conclude from the available direct and indirect evidence that, as opposed to dfrB1 - dfrB7, the recently discovered dfrB variants, are less likely associated with mobile elements which are recognized as major facilitators of the spread of clinically relevant antimicrobial resistance [61]. Nevertheless, this must not be misinterpreted in the sense that the newly identified dfrB variants are generally immobile and thus pose a lower risk compared to other TMP resistance genes. In particular, dfrB10 was originally discovered on a plasmid [60] and our data set demonstrates rare cases of combined TMP-aminoglycoside resistance involving dfrB10. Also dfrB9 was earlier detected within a plasmid-based integron in a clinical isolate classified as Enterobacteriaceae and other novel dfrB variants were found in the context of CALINs previously [30] (dfrB12, dfrB19) or in the present study (dfrB15). Hence, clear indications exist for actual and potential mobility of the recently discovered dfrB variants. Consequently, we have to expect that, under ambient conditions selecting for TMP resistance, these variants can undergo a fast spread by horizontal gene transfer in addition to vertical proliferation. Besides emissions from sewage disposal, many surface waters receive additional anthropogenic inputs of bacteria linked to livestock farming and runoff from organically fertilized soils [62]. We cannot exclude that the occurrence of the environment-associated variants like dfrB9 or dfrB10 reflects such agricultural inputs. However, our data do not comprise any evidence for such a hypothesis. First, if the detection of the mentioned dfrB variants was reflecting emissions from livestock farming under TMP-selective conditions, we would expect them to commonly appear in neighborship with other resistance genes or mobile elements just like their wastewater-borne counterparts dfrB1 to dfrB7. This was not the case. Moreover, copies of dfrB10, dfrB13, dfrB16, and dfrB19 were also recovered from sequences which are very unlikely to be impacted by intensive farming. This applies in particular to the river sediment metagenomes from the US-based Great Smoky Mountains national park and unpolluted sites considered in one the datasets from Germany. Finally, if the occurrences of dfrB genes in river-borne samples was determined by contamination from external sources, we would expect to find the genes preferably in the water phase mediating the transport. However, in the most comprehensive dataset (label “q” in Table 1) which comprises water and sediment-borne samples, we rather see the opposite trend (Fig. 3A). The relative abundance of dfrB genes is significantly higher in sediment-borne DNA compared to the water-borne DNA at both polluted and unpolluted sampling sites. This is in contrast to dfrA where the higher relative abundance in the water phase as compared to sediment reflects a contamination of sampling sites exposed to WWTP effluents (green boxes Fig. 3B).Fig. 3Relative abundance of dfrB and dfrA genes aggregated at family level in samples from the Lockwitzbach River Basin, Germany (study label “q” in Table 1).Panel A refers to the dfrB gene and panel B to dfrA. The p values refer to a shift in location between water and sediment-borne samples (Wilcoxon rank sum test). Note the custom y-axis resulting from power transformation with an exponent of 0.2. Fig. 3Relative abundance of dfrB and dfrA genes aggregated at family level in samples from the Lockwitzbach River Basin, Germany (study label “q” in Table 1).Panel A refers to the dfrB gene and panel B to dfrA. The p values refer to a shift in location between water and sediment-borne samples (Wilcoxon rank sum test). Note the custom y-axis resulting from power transformation with an exponent of 0.2. Relative abundance of dfrB and dfrA genes aggregated at family level in samples from the Lockwitzbach River Basin, Germany (study label “q” in Table 1). Panel A refers to the dfrB gene and panel B to dfrA. The p values refer to a shift in location between water and sediment-borne samples (Wilcoxon rank sum test). Note the custom y-axis resulting from power transformation with an exponent of 0.2. Implications for AMR research and management Our findings suggest that the classical dfrB gene variants like dfrB1 or dfrB4 are established in human-associated bacterial communities as signaled by their primary association with wastewater metagenomes. Hence, together with members of the dfrA family, these dfrB variants appear to actively contribute to contemporary, clinically relevant bacterial resistance against TMP. By contrast, gene variants like dfrB9, dfrB10, or dfrB13 were rarely detected in an anthropogenic context, yet they appear to be present in many freshwater systems around the world. The respective aquatic bacterial communities thus represent a reservoir of additional TMP resistance that is potentially mobilizable and could further compromise the treatment of bacterial infections in the future. The full spectrum of dfrB genes present in environmental bacterial communities is yet to be disclosed. A list of 20 new candidate dfrB genes was released only recently [30] and the metagenomes screened in this study suggest a considerable potential for new gene discoveries as well. This can be demonstrated by comparing the abundance of the presently known dfrB to the abundance of dfrB-like sequences satisfying a relaxed criterion of sequence identity (Fig. 4). Especially river-borne community DNA contains a notable amount of additional dfrB-like sequences, some of which may turn out to be novel TMP resistance genes in future analyses.Fig. 4Effect of the chosen similarity threshold on the relative abundance of dfrB-like sequences identified in datasets of different origin.Bars represent averages, whiskers illustrate maximum values. Fig. 4Effect of the chosen similarity threshold on the relative abundance of dfrB-like sequences identified in datasets of different origin.Bars represent averages, whiskers illustrate maximum values. Effect of the chosen similarity threshold on the relative abundance of dfrB-like sequences identified in datasets of different origin. Bars represent averages, whiskers illustrate maximum values. From a research-centered perspective, we propose to work toward a more comprehensive understanding of the distribution of dfrB across ecosystems or geographic regions. Ideally, the respective samples would be acquired, processed, and sequenced according to common protocols so as to exclude methodology-borne biases in comparisons between data subsets. Standardization would need to cover, for example, DNA extraction protocols, library preparation, read length, or sequencing depth and should also consider sample barcoding schemes that reduce the chance of misclassification (e.g., through unique dual indexing). Metagenomic sequencing should further be complemented by a more sensitive quantification of dfrB via quantitative or digital PCR to better discriminate actually low gene abundances from undersampling effects. Likewise, we suggest fostering the identification of the respective bacterial hosts and the genetic framing to improve our understanding of the evolutionary trajectories of the different dfrB variants as well as possible pathways of past and future proliferation. The assembly of long-read metagenomic sequences [63, 64] might be a viable approach toward improved host characterization but it certainly remains challenging in view of the low relative abundance of dfrB and the substantial diversity of natural bacterial communities. Plasmid-capturing [65] and subsequent sequencing would be a possible means to specifically target dfrB genes of high lateral mobility. Our study demonstrates that the prevalence of antimicrobial resistance genes must be examined at the level of particular gene variants. A more aggregated analysis at the dfrB gene family level, for instance, would not have resolved the existing contrasts in gene distributions. Overall, our study highlights the possibility of omnipresent environmental genes being promoted into a threat for human society. Thus, the concentrations of antibiotics to which environmental communities are exposed must be held below selective thresholds [66] not only to control the spread of established ARGs but also to prevent the rise of yet unknown genes hidden in environmental communities. Our study demonstrates that a promotion of such unknown resistance genes can be triggered even by synthetic drugs, like TMP, where natural analogs had not been an original selection factor.