DISCUSSION Antibiotic-producing microorganisms exhibit effective strategies to avoid self-harm. Studies on self-resistance genes against antibiotics have enabled the discovery of novel natural products with resistance genes as selective markers. These genes have enabled the investigation of strategies to deal with increasing bacterial antibiotic resistance (27–29). Antibiotic efflux via molecular pumps are an effective resistance mechanism. Complex regulation mechanisms are involved in processes that cause the upregulation of efflux pumps (30). Substrates for efflux pumps can frequently influence the expression of pump regulators (31). Our research demonstrated regulatory links between the regulator LexR, efflux pump LexABC, and myxin in L. antibioticus. Mutant lexR decreased myxin resistance, myxin production, and lexABC expression. Moreover, the expression of lexABC increased with the accumulation of myxin in vivo, and exogenous addition of myxin to a phenazine-deficient mutant considerably enhanced lexABC expression (17). LexR directly and positively regulated the expression of lexABC by binding its promoter, and myxin strengthened the binding with LexR as the receptor. Secondary metabolites, including antibiotics, can act as signaling molecules for the control of gene expression (32). The expression of efflux pumps is often induced by transcription factors that respond to small-molecule inducers (21, 33). A model regulation system, phenazine/SoxR/MexGHI-OpmD, for natural product efflux and self-protection in antibiotic-producing bacteria has been established in P. aeruginosa. MexGHI-OpmD is upregulated by pyocyanin and its endogenous intermediate 5-methylphenazine-1-carboxylate (5-Me-PCA). The induction of mexGHI-opmD by phenazine is mediated by activating the redox-active transcription factor SoxR via oxidation or nitrosylation of its [2Fe-2S] cluster (34–36). PCA signals activate mexGHI-opmD in P. aeruginosa M18, and SoxR mediates the downstream regulation of PCA. A conserved Sox-dependent transcriptional regulatory role likely exists for phenazine pigment efflux (37). Myxin is an N-oxidation and O-methylation phenazine, which distinguishes it from pyocyanin, 5-Me-PCA, and PCA. The LexABC pump is similar to MexHI-OpmD, but efflux regulation can differ between and even within bacterial species, depending on cellular physiological status. Activation of lexABC is mediated by the LysR family, not a SoxR-type regulator. We propose a specific pathway for the myxin response and efflux in L. antibioticus. Regulators of efflux pumps usually possess a drug-binding pocket within the ligand-binding domain. Binding of drugs or natural products to these regulators modulates their transcriptional activity (38). AdeL, a LysR-type transcriptional regulator, contains a helix-turn-helix domain and substrate-binding domain responsible for negative regulation of the RND efflux pump, AdeFGH, in Acinetobacter baumannii (26, 39). The human pathogen A. baumannii exhibited increased resistance with mutations in adeL that induce upregulation of the AdeFGH efflux pump (40). A valine-to-glycine substitution at position 139 of AdeL (V139G) in the signal recognition domain induced overexpression of AdeFGH in A. baumannii mutant strain BM4664 (26). LexR shares 55% similarity with AdeL (17). However, positive regulators of LexABC show a conserved valine at position 146 (26, 41). A valine-to-alanine substitution at this position (V146A) led to weak binding of myxin, further confirming that the conserved valine is a signal recognition site. Another binding residue, K195, is not conserved in LysR family regulators and could be specific for myxin. Moreover, the SPR binding curve and corresponding raw data showed no signal plateau, which indicated a stoichiometry of 1:1 for the myxin-LexR interaction. The in vivo site mutation of K195 resulted in less lexA transcription which, consistent with the SPR data, supported the importance of the K195 residue for LexR. Overall, we have defined a regulatory mechanism for myxin efflux in L. antibioticus. The LysR family regulator LexR binds with myxin and directly upregulates the LexABC pump (Fig. 8). This pump increases the transport of myxin, affording self-protection to L. antibioticus. FIG 8Proposed model for LexR regulation of the LexABC pump in myxin efflux of L. antibioticus. LexR senses and binds to myxin and then directly upregulates the LexABC pump. This pump increases the transport of myxin, affording self-protection to L. antibioticus. The red circle represents myxin. Proposed model for LexR regulation of the LexABC pump in myxin efflux of L. antibioticus. LexR senses and binds to myxin and then directly upregulates the LexABC pump. This pump increases the transport of myxin, affording self-protection to L. antibioticus. The red circle represents myxin.