4. Discussion Fusarium is a widely distributed filamentous fungus worldwide, and taxonomic studies have identified approximately 400 phylogenetically distinct species in the genus Fusarium (https://www.Fusarium.org, accessed on 5 July 2023). Although the genus Fusarium is not the most abundant filamentous fungus, Fusarium is one of the filamentous fungal groups most closely associated with agricultural production and human health. Mycotoxins produced by pathogenic Fusarium species, such as DON, fumonisin B1, T-2 toxin, zearalenone and fumonisins, cause scab, foot rot and head blight on crops and food poisoning in humans and animals F [1]. Advances in sequencing technology have enabled more Fusarium genomes to be sequenced, and the deepening of biosynthesis research has continuously revealed the biosynthesis pathways of Fusarium mycotoxins. These results provide more convenience for the understanding and cognition of mycotoxins. The statistical analysis of BGC types predicted by antiSMASH found that the number of various BGCs in the 35 pathogenic Fusarium species showed a convergence, that is, the number of NRPSs was the largest, while the number of hybrid enzymes was the least. Among these predicted NRPSs, nearly half (362) of the sequences are actually NRPS-like (Figure S57). Among the real 400 NRPSs, a small number of NRPSs are siderophore-associated transport peptides, such as NPS2 and NPS6 distributed in 32 pathogenic Fusarium species (Figure 7). Most NRPSs are the core enzymes of toxic peptide biosynthesis, such as beauvericin synthase distributed in nineteen species. As far as PKSs are concerned, the BGCs for gibepyrones (Figure 13), fusarubins (Figure 14) and bikaverins (Figure 16), three typical polyketide compounds, are almost widely present in these 35 pathogenic Fusarium species. In addition, homologous sequences of several PKSs identified in non-Fusarium species, such as FogA (Figure 17) and SdnO (Figure S34), were identified in multiple pathogenic Fusarium species, and the corresponding BGCs were highly similar. This finding suggests interspecies conservation in the production of these toxins. The production of toxins by microorganisms is usually considered to be a defense against external enemies and an adaptation to the environment, whereas the prevalence of such toxin BGCs may be the result of horizontal gene transfer [105,106,107,108]. In the cluster analysis of PKS-NRPSs, the clade within FusA and Fus1 is the largest cluster among the hybrid enzymes, and the clade within LUC5 is the closest to it (Figure 20). The structural similarity between Fusarin C catalyzed by FusA or Fus1 (Figure 2) and LUC5 catalytic product (Figure 22) reflects their sequence similarity. In addition, a new PKS-NPRS group with eighteen members was found (Figure 19). Although FsdS is the closest relative to this group on the phylogenetic tree, its domain composition is significantly different (Figure S48). PKS-NRPS hybrid enzymes are the main contributors to hybrid toxins, but they are not the only ones. The cooperation of PKS and NRPS also produces hybrid toxins, such as PKS40 and NRPS32 to produce W493 B (Figure 11) and PKS6 and NRPS7 to produce fusaristatin A (Figure 12). However, the hybrid product created by this synergistic effect does not possess the nitrogen-containing five-membered heterocyclic pyrrolidone contained in the natural hybrid compound, such as Fusarin C (Figure 21). The hazards of mycotoxins to human production activities are self-evident, and there is a great deal of concern about how to effectively prevent these toxicities. Inhibiting the production of these toxins in the causative organisms is a highly effective preventive program that addresses the toxin problem at its source. The results of the present study provide support for such a program. For example, BeaS, the core enzyme for the biosynthesis of beauvericins, which is present in eighteen pathogenic Fusarium species and a variety of other filamentous fungi (Figure 8), could be a target for the development of antimicrobial drugs for the inhibition of beauvericin production.