DISCUSSION We have experimentally characterised five genome-encoded ARE-ABCF proteins that are implicated in the intrinsic antibiotic resistance of S. capreolus (AAF1 Ard1), N. vireti (ARE2 VmlR2), and Clostridia C. difficile, C. perfringens and C. sporogenes (ARE1 CplR). As we show here, the ΔvmlR B. subtilis strain is a convenient surrogate host for uncovering the resistance spectra of different ARE-ABCFs. Thus, antibiotic sensitivity assays using heterologous expression in ΔvmlR B. subtilis could be used to study other chromosomal ABCFs, guided by bioinformatic surveys. Our cryo-EM reconstruction of the N. vireti VmlR2-70S complex is broadly similar to structures of other ARE-ABCFs with specificity for PLSA antibiotics. The ARD of these elements is counter-intuitively both essential for resistance and poorly conserved at the sequence level, exemplified by the eight-amino-acid insertion in the VmlR2 ARD compared to the B. subtilis VmlR ARD, despite the similar antibiotic resistance profiles of both these ARE-ABCFs (Figure 1B, Table 1, Supplementary Figure S8). We observe the extended VmlR2 ARD to be oriented mostly away from the PTC and towards the P-tRNA, reminiscent of the ARDs from more distantly-related PLSA-specific ARE-ABCFs such as LsaA, VgaALC and VgaL (Supplementary Figure S8). Thus, ARDs from PLSA-specific ARE-ABCFs can accommodate addition or deletion of amino acids while only modestly modulating their position with respect to the PTC. To date, all ribosome-bound ARE-ABCF structures have shown either a modest overlap between the factor and the antibiotic binding site, or no overlap at all—a pattern which holds for ARE-ABCFs specific for both PLSAs as well as macrolide, ketolide, and streptogramin Bs (26,34,41,43). This pattern is challenged by our results expanding the specificity of VmlR and VmlR2 to the nucleoside antibiotics A201A and Hygromycin A (Table 1), as each of these antibiotics occupy the PLSA binding site but additionally extend towards the A site. Modelled overlaps between VmlR and these antibiotics are extensive (Supplementary Figure S9). However, consistent with previous ARE-ABCF structures, an overlap between the ARE-ABCF and the antibiotic is not strictly required for resistance, as mutants predicted to abrogate the modelled overlap do not abolish activity (Table 1) (26,34,41). We note that VmlR2 induces distortions in the PTC nucleotides that would disrupt the antibiotic binding site, especially in the region around A2451, which we term PTC loop 2. Such a distortion is common to other PLSA ARE-ABCFs (26). The most clinically important aspect of this work is the detailed study of the Clostridial ARE1 CplR. The Gram-positive anaerobic spore-forming bacterium C. difficile is a causative agent of nosocomial and chronic infections as well as healthcare-associated diarrhoea (107). Disruption of the protective gut microbiota by broad-spectrum antibiotics allows for efficient proliferation of antibiotic-resistant C. difficile in the gut, thus triggering C. difficile infection, CDI (108). C. difficile has high levels of antibiotic resistance, and treatment with lincosamides such as clindamycin has long been recognised as a risk factor for development of CDI, especially in the case of erm + strains (51,56–59). As we show here, (i) similarly to L. monocytogenes ARE-ABCF VgaL and 23S ribosomal RNA methyltransferase Cfr (48), C. difficile CplR synergises with the 23S rRNA methyltransferase Erm to grant high levels of PLSA resistance, and, (ii) analogously to other experimentally studied ARE-ABCFs, induction of CplR is controlled by ribosomal stalling on a regulatory uORF. These results warrant a systematic exploration for co-occurrence of ARE-ABCFs and 23S rRNA methyltransferase antibiotic resistance determinants, with a special focus on the cases of their co-localisation in one operon on a mobile element (as is observed for LsaA and Cfr (49,50)). We demonstrate the utility of our bioinformatic tool uORF4u (61) for identification of regulatory uORFs and their consensus sequences. The induction of ARE-ABCFs relies on antibiotic-induced ribosomal stalling on regulatory uORFs (27–32), and for elongation inhibitors such as macrolides, phenicols and oxazolidinones, antibiotic-induced ribosomal stalling is context-specific (14,15,17,109–112). A dedicated follow-up investigation of the relationship between uORF consensuses and ARE-ABCF resistance and antibiotic inducibility spectrum is warranted. The specific sequence conservation of the uORF could point towards as-yet-uncharacterized patterns of sequence-specific antibiotic-mediated ribosomal stalling that are used by the cell to trigger the resistance factor induction upon an antibiotic challenge. As we have shown earlier, in the case of B. subtilis VmlR, the sequence identity of the regulatory uORF(MIN) is crucial for efficient induction upon a lincomycin challenge (31), despite this antibiotic not being known to act in a context-dependent manner. These insights, in turn, could potentially be leveraged for development of antibiotic variants with unnatural novel stalling profiles that are not detected by uORF-mediated attenuation mechanisms, and, therefore, do not trigger inducible resistance.