DISCUSSION Wild-type yeast is highly resistant to fumonisins, but we were successfully able to engineer a susceptible strain, YTKT33, by deleting several genes. Fumonisins are highly charged and water-soluble molecules (two tricarballylic acid side groups and a basic amine residue). An interesting, still unsolved question is how fumonisin enters the cell, as it is too polar to pass directly through lipid membranes. Obviously, yeast utilizes ABC transporters to reduce the concentration at the target through active afflux. We combined the described yor1 mutation with a disruption of SNQ2 (implicated in resistance to a broad range of mostly cationic compounds). In addition, we inactivated the ABC transporter encoded by PDR12, which is required for resistance to various weak acids. We settled for the triple mutant, yet these alterations may also sensitize the strain for other toxins or potentially so-far undescribed fumonisin synergists that might be present in crude extracts. Fumonisin FB1 accounted for about 75% of the total B-type fumonisins in the crude extract. The additionally present FB2, FB3, and FB4 cannot fully explain the observed higher toxicity of the crude extract. In principle, other toxins or yet unknown low-toxicity substances acting as synergists of fumonisin might explain the higher toxicity of the crude extract. This effect limits the utility of semi-quantitative determination using the indicator strain in a bioassay. Since the inhibitory activity of the crude extract could be abolished by preincubation with FUMzyme (data not shown), the increased IC50 in the crude extract compared to pure fumonisin is likely due to substances that do not confer toxicity on their own but rather act as synergists of fumonisin. Based on previous studies using mammalian cells, there does not appear to be any evidence for a synergism between fumonisin B1 and frequently co-produced Fusarium toxins, e.g., between the cyclic depsipeptides enniatins or beauvericin (38, 39). Potentially, moniliformin (40) or fusaproliferin might also be involved, which should be investigated in future work. Medium composition and growth conditions have a strong influence on fumonisin toxicity. The binding of fumonisins, acting as competitive inhibitors of ceramide synthase, could be outcompeted by the concentration of the natural substrates of the enzyme that may be abundant, especially in rich media containing yeast extract. Particularly important in rich mediums was the targeting of the recycling pathway. As of yet, little is known about the degradation of complex sphingolipids and their reintegration into the biosynthesis pathway. Yeast produces inositol phosphosphingolipids, which can be hydrolyzed by the ISC1 gene product (inositol phosphosphingolipid phospholipase C) back to phytoceramide and dihydroceramide, the products of ceramide synthase. This gene might be a candidate for an additional knockout, aiming to further decrease fumonisin resistance on YPD medium. Yeast can be screened at high density on microtiter plates, where oxygen supply is low compared to growth on an agar surface. However, the slower (fermentative) growth under oxygen limitation seems to increase FB1 resistance. The concentration to inhibit growth was about one order of magnitude higher in SC liquid medium than in SC-URA agar plates. The previously described fumonisin detoxification genes and a gene encoding an insensitive ceramide synthase all conferred FB1 resistance when expressed in YTKT33, validating the utility of the developed strain. The observed resistance level cannot be taken as direct evidence that one enzyme detoxifies better than the other. In a study where Lemna minor (duckweed) was exposed to HFB1 and deaminated FB1 (FPy1), the latter exhibited less toxicity than HFB1 (21). However, the final resistance level is not only caused by the reduced toxicity of the product but is also dependent on the catalytic properties and the expression level of the enzyme, which we have not determined in this study. Nevertheless, it is clear from our results that cytosolic Sphingopyxis fumD lacking the bacterial secretion signal can counteract a high level of FB1 entering the cell. It has been reported that hydrolyzed FB1 can be acylated and used as a substrate by ceramide synthases present in rat liver microsomes, forming toxic compounds (41). Under our experimental settings, even if N-acylation of HFB1 took place, it was insufficient to show toxicity. Hydrolysis of FB1 was also clearly shown to be a useful detoxification strategy in piglets through reduction of intestinal inflammation (37, 42). Strain YTKT33 can be employed in the classical agar diffusion assay. Compounds that inhibit fumonisin biosynthesis at concentrations that are not inhibitory for growth have been described, e.g., pyrrocidine (43). The developed strain could be useful in screens for such substances or to study the mode of action of natural products or plant extracts that seemingly counteract fumonisin toxicity in ill-understood ways, e.g., reference (44). We have shown that by placing the commercially available detoxification enzyme FUMzyme next to the toxin, the deformed halo reveals the detoxification ability of the enzyme. In a more simple setup, preincubating amounts of FB1 with a detoxication agent and observing a diminished inhibition zone would be a possible embodiment of the utilization of the developed strain. Overall, the generated strain is clearly an improvement over previously reported indicator organisms (brine shrimp, hydra, duckweed), with the advantage that it can be used for heterologous expression of foreign genes and for high-throughput screening. It should be useful to identify currently unknown detoxification genes. For instance, it is unclear which gene encodes the fungal acetyltransferase converting FB1 to non-toxic acetylated fumonisin A1. Furthermore, there is a lack of knowledge about whether plant enzymes are involved in the production of hidden and bound fumonisins (45). The yeast indicator strain could be useful to rapidly test mutants of detoxification genes generated by site-directed mutagenesis or to select variants with superior kinetic properties from randomly mutagenized plasmids based on their ability to confer higher levels of resistance than the starting material. This can be achieved through high-throughput screening of the candidate genes using YTKT33. Potentially, novel genes could also be identified by expressing cDNA libraries and selecting resistance-conferring clones, similar to the approach leading to the identification of a deoxynivalenol-inactivating gene (46).