DISCUSSION Our analysis revealed that TTRs are widespread in bacteria and archaea and in some genomes, for example Raoultibacter timonensis, they are a major type of transcription regulators (41% of all DNA-binding transcription factors). We found that TTRs are abundant in species from the gut microbiota. For example, species within the Eggerthella genus (the Coriobacteriales order), contain a high number of TTRs per genome (~117 TTRs) (see File S1 in the supplemental material). The Eggerthellaceae family are common members of mammalian gastrointestinal tracts (58–62). Members of the Bacteroidia, commonly associated within the human gastrointestinal tract, were also found to contain a high number of TTRs and hybrid TTRs within their genomes (Fig. 1–4). There is evidence that hybrid TTRs within Bacteroides genus function to sense and respond to disaccharides (63). It remains to be seen whether TTRs within the Coriobacteriales and Bacteroidota contribute to their ability to colonize mammalian gastrointestinal environments, but our data have revealed this correlation. The advantage of TTRs versus classical one- and two-component systems is not obvious: why bring the response regulator and DNA-binding domain to the cytoplasmic membrane? One possibility is that the membrane itself serves as a signal to further fine tune these signal transduction pathways. It is generally recognized that the membrane environment is not a homogenous. For example, a vast majority of integral membrane proteins are heterogeneously distributed in Bacillus subtilis cells, indicating that their diffusion within the cytoplasmic membrane is limited (64, 65). Both bacterial and eukaryotic cells support the formation of small-lipid-raft membrane regions (43–45). Generally speaking, lipid raft and non-lipid-raft membrane regions differ by their overall fluidity and thickness, with lipid rafts having a lower fluidity and increased thickness, as a consequence of the phospholipid species that occupy these membrane environments (45, 46, 66–69). These membrane regions have been shown to influence many signaling pathways in eukaryotic cells, in particular T cells (46–55). There is also evidence that dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids can influence formation and stability of lipid ordered membrane domains thereby influencing signal transduction (48, 49). Here, we demonstrate that a large fraction of TTRs (approximately 43%) can associate with lipid raft membrane regions. These data support our hypothesis that the membrane environment may serve to influence TTR function; however, additional studies are required to further test this hypothesis. In addition to the potential influence of the cytoplasmic membrane, it is also feasible that localization of TTRs to the cytoplasmic membrane facilitates tighter regulatory controls on TTR regulons. That is, not only do TTRs require a signal to impact gene expression, but that the target promoter sequence(s) must be in close proximity to the cytoplasmic membrane. This would imply that the structure of the chromosome (which is influenced by nucleoid associated proteins, transcription, translation, DNA supercoiling, and condensins) also contributes to TTR gene regulation. This would indicate that TTRs could contribute to regulation of complex lifestyles among microorganisms. Within the Alphaproteobacteria, a family of LytTR response regulators, not exclusively TTRs, were identified (70). Curiously, within Caulobacter cresentus all instances of the LytTR response regulator domain contain one or more TM regions (70). This could explain the high degree of variation of TTRs across the bacterial and archaeal domains. Some TTRs (such as ToxR, VtrA, VtrrA, PsaE, MyfE, TcpP, and YqeI) have an associated protein that contributes to TTR mediated signal transduction by inhibiting proteolysis of the TTR or by stimulating heterodimer formation (Table 1). These TTRs are also referred to as cocomponent systems (71). Curiously, many of these associated proteins contain a lipocalin-like domain, which has been shown to be important for VtrC binding to bile, but generally are known to bind to small hydrophobic molecules (71, 72). Rather than responding to the cytoplasmic membrane itself, localization of TTRs to the cytoplasmic membrane may facilitate function of cocomponent systems. Our data suggest that TTRs play a much larger role in signal transduction than previously thought, implying that transcription initiation also occurs at the membrane-DNA interface across bacterial and archaeal species. However, compared to the number of TTRs identified by our analysis the number of experimentally validated TTRs is extremely low indicating that a large fraction of TTRs function remains to be understood (Table 1). In support of this, a substantial fraction of TTRs identified here (~57%) contains only a DNA-binding domain and no additional recognizable domains of known function (Fig. 5B). Thus, this work provides new insights into the prevalence and distribution of TTRs within bacteria and archaea reveals unique features of these regulators.