Discussion We have developed a new, computationally light approach toward SM resistance gene-guided genome mining that enables a user to query an entire genomic database for SM BGCs with resistance genes of their choice without having to download any genomes. This allows the user to focus on specific proteins that are promising therapeutic targets. To evaluate this approach, we have searched the genomes in MycoCosm for gene clusters that putatively produce inhibitors of the proteasome β6 subunit and of HMGCR. With respect to inhibitors of the proteasome β6 subunit, we can draw several conclusions. First, the approach works, revealing known and new fellutamide-family clusters as confirmed by rigorous pairwise BLASTP comparisons. Second, our distance-based approach yielded few hits other than fellutamide clusters. Manual inspection revealed that, when looking at the NRPS clusters and using the 70 kb cutoff, only two of the 81 initial hits were clearly not in partial or complete fellutamide-family clusters. Even when looking at 1825 fungal genomes, our distance-based approach generates very few false positives. Third, there are additional genes within or immediately adjacent to the clusters that could be involved in producing structural variants of fellutamides. It is worth noting that at least four fellutamide variants are known to be produced in nature (Shigemori et al., 1991; Xu et al., 2011), and our data suggest that there could be additional novel fellutamides that potentially have value in medicine or other fields. Finally, we note that our BLAST search returned only 1557 proteasome β6 subunit genes from 1825 genomes. Since each gene should have at least one β6 subunit gene, our list likely did not include some phylogenetically divergent β6 subunit genes. One might be able to obtain a more complete list by using multiple phylogenetically distant β6 genes for BLAST searches. With respect to HMGCR inhibitor BGCs, our approach was not only effective at finding lovastatin family BGCs, but also revealed previously undocumented BGCs that have a high potential for making HMGCR inhibitors with backbone structures that are different from lovastatin. Rigorous review using pairwise BLASTP comparisons of the initial 85 PKS hits generated by our approach has enabled us to verify, with confidence, 20 PKS hits representing 11 BGCs in 11 genomes (including A. terreus NIH 2624) as being surrounded by homologs of lovastatin cluster genes. These are, thus, lovastatin-family BGCs, although the A. homomorphus CBS 101889 v1.0 BGC was clearly incomplete and could not make lovastatin. Some of these BGCs (e.g., those in A. terreus and M. ruber) are known to make lovastatin, but it is possible that others may make analogs of lovastatin such as pravastatin and the various monacolins (Manzoni and Rollini, 2002) or as yet undiscovered lovastatin-related compounds. Xylaria sp. FL1777 v1.0, which lacks the lovF homolog, cannot make lovastatin but probably makes monacolin J. More excitingly, our data indicate that there are a substantial number of BGCs that putatively make HMGCR inhibitors with chemical backbones that are different from lovastatin. Some of these BGCs are found only in a single species, as is frequently the case with fungal SM BGCs (de Vries et al., 2017), but we also discovered families of related BGCs. We found three small families of PKS BGCs from eight PKS initial hits that are quite different from lovastatin family BGCs and putatively make novel classes of HMGCR inhibitors (Supplementary Spreadsheet 2, A. olivicola Family, A. transmontanensis Family, and A. japonicus Family tabs). In addition to these PKS clusters, we found one interesting terpene cluster family (Supplementary Spreadsheet 2, A. leporis Family tab), and, even more excitingly, we found a very interesting family of 19 NRPS clusters which are in six genera of basidiomycetes (Supplementary Spreadsheet 2, Pisolithus Family tab)—exemplifying that our simple distance-based approach can find resistant SM BGCs across the entire fungal kingdom. The products of each of these BGCs are predicted to be HMGCR inhibitors, and it is possible that some may be more medically efficacious than lovastatin or amenable to chemical modification to make particularly efficacious HMGCR inhibitors. It is also possible that some of them might have different specificities from lovastatin. One can speculate, for example, that some of them might specifically inhibit fungal HMGCRs since other fungi are among the the chief competitors of these organisms. Our results with HMGCR and the proteasome β6 subunit as targets are of intrinsic interest that could, potentially, lead to the development of new therapeutics. Just as importantly, they validate our approach and suggest that this approach can be used to identify BGCs that produce compounds that inhibit other targets of choice. Effects of Altering the Distance Cutoff in Our Script One might worry with a distance-based approach that increasing the distance threshold would result in false positives in which the putative resistance gene is actually a housekeeping gene that happens to be near a BGC. Our data indicate, however, that this is not a significant concern. Our most informative data are from our search for β6 proteasome subunit inhibitors. Our NRPS search querying 1825 genomes with a 70 kb threshold returned 81 initial hits, and in all but two cases (A. multicolor v1.0 and Amylomyces rouxii NRRL 5866 v1.0) the β6 subunit was associated with a fellutamide-family BGC. Supplementary Fig. S5 is a histogram plotting the frequencies of hits as a function of distance between the centers of the NRPSs and the proteasome subunits, out to a cutoff of 100 kb. In 77/84 cases the NRPS and proteasome subunit were less than 20 kb apart. Extending the distance cutoff from 70 to 100 kb added only three additional hits. Examining these hits in MycoCosm revealed them to be false positives. Querying our PKS, terpene synthase, terpene cyclase, and DMATS databases with a distance cutoff of 70 kb returned only 10 hits, nine of which were likely false positives, with one uncertain. With respect to putative HMGCR inhibitor BGC hits across all SM backbones, the majority are new, and they have not yet been experimentally validated. Except for the lovastatin-family BGCs, we cannot say, with confidence, whether these hits are valid or false. In the great majority of cases, however, the putative HMGCR resistance gene appears to be associated with an SM BGC (based on the predicted functions of the proteins encoded by nearby genes), suggesting that the hits are valid. Both β6 proteasome subunit and HMGCR searches used a generous 70 kb cutoff that is unlikely to exclude any valid hits, and they resulted in a small and easily manageable number of likely false positives. While reducing the cutoff would reduce the number of false positives, the benefit is small when weighed against the possibility of missing potentially valuable BGCs. Comparisons With Other Approaches FRIGG (fungal resistance gene-directed genome pipeline) (Kjærbølling et al., 2019b) is designed to work with whole genome sequencing data. It identifies SM BGCs and defines their boundaries based on a fungus-optimized version of the SMURF SM BGC prediction algorithm (Khaldi et al., 2010). It then determines if a member of a list of putative essential resistance gene is found within these clusters, while applying several filtering steps. The authors defined their list of putative essential genes by looking for genes that were conserved in >90% of the organisms under study. It should be pointed out, however, that some conserved genes are not essential. For example, the conserved cyclin gene clbA is not essential in A. nidulans (Paolillo et al., 2018), nor are the conserved γ-tubulin complex genes gcpD, gcpE, and gcpF (Xiong and Oakley, 2009) or the histone H1 gene hhoA (Ramón et al., 2000). This approach depends on SM BGCs being accurately predicted by SM cluster prediction algorithms, and this is not always the case (Inglis et al., 2013). In spite of these caveats, FRIGG has a big advantage in that it can potentially reveal new target proteins. Our results highlight a particular problem in predicting clusters that harbor a resistant allele of an essential gene. Since the resistant allele has no apparent SM function, it may cause the boundary of the cluster to be called incorrectly, resulting in false negatives due to the resistant allele being excluded from the BGC. Among the 39 complete fellutamide family BGC we found, SMURF did not predict the β6 proteasome subunit gene to be a member of the BGC in seven cases (all five of the Lobaria isolates plus Aspergillus indicus v2.0, and T. paradoxa CBS 103.73 v1.0). Among the 10 complete lovastatin family clusters, and SMURF did not predict the HMGCR gene to be a member of the BGC in three cases (C. orchidophilum IMI 309357, M. ruber NRRL 1597 v1.0, and A. chrysellus CBS 472.65 v1.0). A resistance gene-guided genome mining approach using the SMURF cluster prediction algorithm would have missed these fellutamide and lovastatin clusters entirely. Liu et al. (2021) have developed a resistance gene-guided genome mining algorithm for use with MATLAB to identify BGCs that encode CYP51 inhibitors. The approach is similar to ours in that is uses distances between the core biosynthetic and resistance genes, but it differs in important ways. It requires the user to download all the genomes being studied and is built to be used with unannotated genome sequences. It also deals with target genes differently, only including genomes that have more target genes than the average number in all the analyzed genomes. Additionally, it imposes additional filtration constraints based on homology score, and requires specific gene colocalizations. FunARTS (Fungal bioActive compound Resistant Target Seeker) (Yilmaz et al., 2023) is a recently published “exploration engine” for resistance gene-guided genome mining. It requires the user to download genome sequences which are then analyzed using Hidden Markov Models to identify “core genes” which are putative essential housekeeping genes. SM BGCs are identified using fungiSMASH a fungal optimized version of antiSMASH (Blin et al., 2021). Core genes can be analyzed to determine if there are duplicates in the genome and they can be filtered for proximity to BGCs. FunARTS is quite flexible, particularly with respect to outputs, and it can, in principle, find new resistance genes. One weakness of FunARTS is that fungiSMASH may not call BGC boundaries correctly. Another, that the authors point out, is that the current procedure for identifying core genes is imperfect. For example, there were no FunARTS hits for four notable resistance genes including HMGCR and the important antifungal target β-1,3-D-glucan synthase because they were not identified as core genes by the Hidden Markov Model employed in FunARTS. Although these are acknowledged weaknesses, FunARTS is certainly a very valuable tool, and it has the notable strength that it can identify novel gene targets whereas our approach cannot. Significant advances have also been made in resistance gene-guided genome mining in bacteria. In fact, Antibiotic Resistant Target Seeker (ARTS) (Alanjary et al., 2017) and its more advanced successor ARTS 2.0 (Mungan et al. 2020) are predecessors of FunARTS. The approach of ARTS and ARTS 2.0 is similar to that of FunARTS, with similar strengths and limitations, but ARTS was focused on actinomycetes whereas ARTS 2.0 is focused on the entire bacterial kingdom. The workflow for our approach is quite different from those of FRIGG, FunARTS and the approach of Liu et al. (2021). The FRIGG and Liu et al. approaches require the downloading of genomes that one wants to analyze. FRIGG returns both target molecules and the BGCs that putatively make inhibitors of the target molecules. The Liu et al. approach works for a single target molecule at a time. With FunARTS one uploads a genome or genomes of interest to a server that then analyzes it in a variety of ways specified to some extent by the user before outputting interactive summary tables. Our approach works with genomes that have already been sequenced and annotated. The user interacts with the database to create files of core biosynthetic SM genes. These can be used repeatedly for searches with different target molecules. Comma separated values files for new target molecules can be generated through blast searches. Our Python script analyzes the files very rapidly and returns hits that are then analyzed with tools chosen by the user. The script requires only seconds to run even with large target and core SM biosynthetic gene files. We typically use a MacIntosh computer running Python in Xcode, but most desktops and laptops will be more than adequate. Implications With Respect to Horizontal Transfer of Secondary Metabolism Gene Clusters In our search for proteasome β6 inhibitors, we found only fellutamide-family BGCs, but we found them in 41 genomes from species that are in three different classes of fungi, the Leotiomycetes, Eurotiomycetes, and Lecanoromycetes. The fact that we have found closely related clusters among members of phylogenetically distant organisms strongly suggests the clusters have been transferred horizontally. If the fellutamide clusters were exclusively inherited vertically, one would expect that they would fall into phylogenetically related phyla and be common in those phyla. Within the Eurotiomycetes, there appears to be both horizontal and vertical gene transfer. We found fellutamide clusters in 33 Aspergillus genomes and in T. paradoxa CBS 103.73 v1.0, which is phylogenetically distant, suggesting that T. paradoxa CBS 103.73 v1.0 acquired a fellutamide BGC through a horizontal gene transfer event. All of the Aspergillus genomes with fellutamide-family clusters, however, are members of species that are in sections Aeni and Nidulantes of subgenus Nidulantes (Chen et al., 2016). No other Aspergillus species had fellutamide clusters, and this strongly suggests that the fellutamide cluster was vertically inherited from a common ancestor of modern-day Aeni and Nidulantes section Aspergilli. We found lovastatin family clusters in 11 genomes from species that are in two separate classes, the Eurotiomycetes and Sordariomycetes, suggesting that lovastatin family clusters have been transferred horizontally.