Discussion In this study, we developed a fungal genome mining tool, which was based on a manually curated fungal BGC database and custom-made HMM profiles. We demonstrated that our genome mining tool could effectively identify BGCs for previously undiscovered natural products. The onoceroid BGCs characterized in this study could also be identified using antiSMASH; however, the BGCs extracted by antiSMASH contained substantially more genes outside the boundary of a BGC than those extracted in this study (Supplementary Fig. 6). In addition, antiSMASH could not detect the presence of pyr4-like genes in these BGCs. Alternatively, these BGCs could be discovered by standard BLAST search using Pyr4 as a query and subsequent manual investigation of the flanking regions of each identified pyr4-like gene, which, however, requires tedious procedures and might take weeks to months for completion. Therefore, the onoceroid BGCs would not have been effectively discovered using antiSMASH or conventional genome mining methodologies. On the other hand, our genome mining tool has allowed the automated extraction and visualization of all possible BGCs encoding a Pyr4 homologue from approximately 2000 fungal genomes within a single day, which also facilitated the selection of BGCs with unusual features. Although we focused only on BGCs with a pyr4-like terpene cyclase gene in this study, our strategy can be readily applied to extract BGCs that encode a homologue of user-selected proteins. For example, a similar global genome mining analysis can be conducted to extract BGCs encoding a homologue of PydY, which is a domainless enzyme and serves as the pericyclase in the biosynthesis of pyrrocidines (Supplementary Fig. 7)48. PydY and its homologues, namely ScpY48, PN3-2049, G7350, and MGG_1509651, have been found in the biosynthetic pathways of a few fungal polyketide–nonribosomal peptide hybrid molecules; however, their prevalence in fungal natural product pathways has not been investigated. The global genome analysis resulted in the detection of more than 300 BGCs with a pydY homologue (Supplementary Fig. 7 and Supplementary Data 5), some of which displayed interesting features, including those with an SHC/OSC gene and others with both UbiA-like prenyltransferase and polyprenyl pyrophosphate synthase genes. Intriguingly, one of the identified BGCs encodes a Pyr4 homologue and is of chytrid origin, which was mentioned earlier (Fig. 2b). The PydY homologues encoded by these BGCs might possess a catalytic function other than as a pericyclase. Collectively, our genome mining strategy has general applicability and will facilitate and accelerate the discovery of unexploited natural products, particularly those synthesized with the involvement of a domainless enzyme. In our global fungal genome mining study, we discovered three types of onoceroids, which are triterpenoids synthesized from squalene or oxidosqualene through cyclization at both ends of the prenyl chain. Onoceroids have been isolated from bacteria52, ferns53, higher plants54,55, and animals56. However, to the best of our knowledge, onoceroids have never been isolated from fungi. Thus, the present study provides landmark examples of fungal onoceroids and their biosynthetic pathways. In terms of the biosynthesis of onoceroids, BmeTC from the bacterium Bacillus megaterium was the initial onoceroid synthase characterized in 2013, and this enzyme solely transforms squalene into onoceroids52. In the fern Lycopodium clavatum, a pair of homologous enzymes (LCC and LCD or LCE) convert oxidosqualene into onoceroid species57,58. These known enzymes for onoceroid biosynthesis are all homologous to SHCs and OSCs. In contrast, the biosynthesis of fungal onoceroids requires two families of terpene cyclases (i.e., SHC/OSC-like enzyme and Pyr4-family terpene cyclase), introducing an unprecedented biosynthetic mechanism of onoceroids. This study demonstrated that Pyr4-family terpene cyclases are also involved in the biosynthesis of pure (not mero-) terpenoids. The majority of fungal triterpenoids are synthesized through the cyclization of oxidosqualene59–61, and hexaprenyl pyrophosphate is known to serve as the precursor of a few fungal triterpenoids62. However, the fungal onoceroid pathways identified in this study represent rare examples in which squalene is directly cyclized to produce fungal triterpenoids. The biosynthetic pathways of fungal onoceroids discovered in this study can be proposed as follows (Fig. 5). The biosynthesis of homomonoceroid A (4) begins with squalene being cyclized into α-polypodatetraene (1) by the squalene cyclase HomoS through the carbocationic intermediate 14. Subsequently, the FMO HomoM epoxidizes the terminal olefin of 1 to yield epoxide 15, which was not isolated in this study. The Pyr4-family terpene cyclase HomoB then protonates epoxide 15 to initiate the second round of cyclization, and the resulting tetracyclic carbocationic species 16 is neutralized by a water attack, yielding 4. In addition, the bicyclic intermediate 15 is involved in the biosynthesis of fumionoceroid C (7), where FumiB accepts 15 to produce a differently cyclized product fumionoceroid A (5). FumiB first cyclizes 15 into the carbocationic intermediate 17. Instead of being quenched by water, the reaction concludes with a 1,2-hydride shift, 1,2-methyl shift, and deprotonation from C-19. Subsequently, the P450 FumiP hydroxylates 5 at C-24 to complete the biosynthesis. Oxidosqualene can also be accepted by Fumi enzymes, except for FumiP, to produce the C-3 hydroxy analogue of 5, fumionoceroid B (6), through α-polypodatetraen-3β-ol (2) (Supplementary Fig. 8). Meanwhile, the biosynthetic pathway leading to alliaonoceroid D (11) branches from the other two pathways in the first step. AlliS transforms squalene into 8α-hydroxypolypoda-13,17,21-triene (3) instead of 1. After the epoxidation of 3 by AlliM to yield 18, which was not obtained in our work, AlliB cyclizes 18 into alliaonoceroid A (8). The cyclization mode followed by AlliB is similar to that employed by HomoB, but the AlliB-catalyzed reaction uses the C-8 hydroxy group instead of a water molecule to produce the pentacyclic onoceroid 8. Compound 8 then undergoes acetylation at the C-21 hydroxy group; this reaction is catalyzed by the acetyltransferase AlliA, yielding alliaonoceroid C (10). The P450 AlliP then installs a hydroxy group at C-16 to produce 19, which is again acetylated by AlliA to yield the end product 11. In the absence of AlliA, AlliP might cause the hydroxylation of 3 at C-6 to yield a shunt pathway product 19, which is then oxidized by an endogenous enzyme of A. oryzae to give alliaonoceroid B (9) (Supplementary Fig. 8). The three characterized fungal onoceroid pathways suggest that fungi synthesize diverse onoceroids due to various factors affecting structural diversification, such as the (i) cyclization mode of (oxido)squalene, (ii) the reaction mechanisms of Pyr4-family terpene cyclases, and (iii) tailoring reactions. The characterization of other onoceroid BGCs not examined in this study or the construction of artificial pathways with onoceroid biosynthetic genes from different pathways can further expand the molecular diversity of fungal onoceroids.Fig. 5Proposed biosynthetic pathways of the onoceroids obtained in this study.Predicted biosynthetic/reaction intermediates are shown in brackets. Fig. 5Proposed biosynthetic pathways of the onoceroids obtained in this study.Predicted biosynthetic/reaction intermediates are shown in brackets. Proposed biosynthetic pathways of the onoceroids obtained in this study. Predicted biosynthetic/reaction intermediates are shown in brackets. Finally, we obtained two 4-HBA-derived meroterpenoids by the heterologous expression of the mos cluster, which was not detectable by antiSMASH. The major product from the mos cluster, moserinol (12), was determined to be a previously unreported molecule, further demonstrating the utility of our genome mining tool in accessing unexploited compounds. Unfortunately, 12 lacks a structural novelty, as its diastereomers, yahazunol and ent-yahazunol (13), have already been isolated from nature46,63. However, these two compounds have been obtained from a brown alga and a sponge, respectively, and, to the best of our knowledge, these sesquiterpene hydroquinones, and their analogues, have never been reported from fungi. In addition, although 4-HBA is a precursor for diverse meroterpenoids both from primary and secondary metabolism, such as ubiquinones64, xiamenmycin65, and biscognienyneB45, our study provides an intriguing example in which a Pyr4-family terpene cyclase is involved in the biosynthesis of 4-HBA-derived meroterpenoids. Although the complete biosynthetic pathway of 12 and the functions of each Mos protein await to be elucidated in future studies, the biosynthetic route to 12 could be proposed as follows (Supplementary Fig. 9). Initially, the UbiA-like prenyltransferase MosC farnesylates 4-HBA, which is followed by the oxidative decarboxylation by the FMO MosD. Subsequently, the terpene cyclase MosB cyclizes the farnesyl moiety, in which the cyclization is completed by the attack of a water molecule from both sides, resulting in the formation of a pair of epimers, 12 and 13. The proposed pathway is consistent with the fact that mosB, mosC, and mosD are sufficient to yield the two meroterpenoids (Fig. 4b, trace iv). It should also be mentioned that our recent study based on the genome mining analysis reported herein unraveled another unprecedented biosynthetic mechanism for fungal meroterpenoids, in which Pyr4 homologues cyclize the prenyl moiety installed by a dimethylallyltryptophan synthase (DMATS)-type prenyltransferase66. Overall, our global genome mining has so far identified three previously undescribed forms of biosynthetic mechanisms with Pyr4-family terpene cyclases. In conclusion, we successfully isolated several previously unreported natural products using our genome mining tool. We believe that this tool can be widely applied for the discovery of natural products with unprecedented scaffolds. Currently, our genome mining tool mainly targets known–unknown BGCs67, which produce unknown natural products synthesized by the known classes of core enzymes. Recent studies have highlighted the genome mining-driven discovery of unknown–unknown natural products68. We are now enhancing the genome mining platform by incorporating additional functions to readily extract BGCs encoding self-resistance enzymes26 or BGCs that lack a known core protein. This would facilitate the discovery of unexploited bioactive or unknown–unknown natural products from fungi.