DISCUSSION P. aeruginosa releases chemically diverse small molecules that have physiological effects not only on other organisms, including hosts, but also on their producer (52). Among these, cyanide is noteworthy because it is volatile and a potent inhibitor of heme-copper oxidases, which are common components of mitochondrial, bacterial, and archaeal respiratory chains (21, 53, 54). P. aeruginosa cyanide production is particularly enigmatic because this bacterium is known for its proficient use of O2 as a terminal electron acceptor and because it contains six distinct operons encoding subunits of heme-copper oxidases (26, 55). Although P. aeruginosa can also produce a cyanide-insensitive (copper free) oxidase, growth and survival experiments indicate that this oxidase is not necessary for protection against endogenous cyanide under physiological conditions (22, 25). Counterintuitively, P. aeruginosa shows strong induction of ccoN4, encoding a heme-copper oxidase subunit, when treated with cyanide (20). Experiments with exogenously added cyanide suggest that, even though CcoN4-containing oxidases are predicted to be cyanide sensitive (19), this subunit acts synergistically with the cyanide-insensitive oxidase to confer cyanide resistance (20). We set out to investigate the regulation of ccoN4 expression in the context of P. aeruginosa PA14 toxin production, respiration, and biofilm physiology. ccoN4 lies in a previously identified cluster of six genes that are induced by cyanide (20) and is immediately adjacent to the regulatory gene mpaR (39). Although we did not take an in vitro approach to studying MpaR’s interactions with its targets, the results of our genetic analyses allow us to make inferences about MpaR’s control of ccoN4 and PA14_10540-mpaR expression. We confirmed that MpaR is required for ccoN4 expression and that full induction of ccoN4 requires endogenous cyanide production. Furthermore, we identified a short palindromic sequence (ATCTGAT) in the ccoN4 promoter region that is necessary for this induction. An identical motif appears in the promoter regions of each of the three predicted operons within the so-called “cyanide-inducible gene cluster” (ccoN4-ccoQ4, PA14_10540-mpaR, and nirA-PA14_10560) at almost the exact same relative location (61, 62, and 62 bp upstream of their respective transcription start sites) (23) (Fig. 4C). Experiments with an engineered strain that constitutively produces MpaR revealed that cyanide production is required for full MpaR-dependent induction of ccoN4 and not solely for induction of mpaR. The fact that the PA14_10540 promoter contains the putative MpaR-binding motif suggests the existence of a positive feedback loop that amplifies the response to cyanide. Prior transcriptomic studies, comparing WT P. aeruginosa to both a cyanide-null mutant (∆hcnB) and a ∆mpaR mutant, also allow us to make inferences regarding the regulatory effects of cyanide and MpaR. The genes in the “cyanide-inducible gene cluster” stood out among those in the cyanide stimulon due to their high level of induction (20) and also showed high changes in expression in the study comparing the WT and ∆mpaR transcriptomes (39) (Fig. S2). These findings suggest that cyanide affects transcription mainly through MpaR. Consistent with our observation that ccoN4 expression occurs at low levels in the ∆hcn background but is abolished in the ∆mpaR background, the MpaR regulon contains genes that are not in the cyanide stimulon, and some of these show strong dependence on MpaR (20, 39), underscoring the possibility that MpaR exhibits both cyanide-independent and cyanide-dependent activity. MpaR is predicted to contain an N-terminal helix-turn-helix DNA-binding domain and a C-terminal domain with homology to PLP-dependent aminotransferases, connected by a flexible 31-residue linker (44, 45). These characteristics suggest that MpaR is a member of the MocR subfamily within the GntR family of bacterial transcription factors (56). Although members of the MocR subfamily contain a domain with homology to PLP-dependent aminotransferases, studies have indicated that this domain is not enzymatically active and that in these proteins, binding of PLP and/or related compounds instead serves as a modulator of transcription factor function (57–60). In Bacillus clausii PdxR, for example, it has been shown that the binding of PLP to the C-terminal domain can affect the conformation of the N-terminal domain, thereby changing the protein’s affinity for distinct DNA-binding motifs (61). It should be noted that PLP, a critical cofactor in diverse metabolic pathways, reacts readily with cyanide to generate cyanohydrins (62, 63). Given that we observe MpaR-dependent gene induction in response to cyanide, we hypothesize that MpaR is activated by binding of cyanide-modified PLP (i.e., the cyanohydrin form or PLP-CN), which triggers a conformational change in the N-terminal domain that promotes DNA binding. This mechanism of regulation would require that PLP and PLP-CN differentially affect MpaR’s conformation. To examine this possibility, we used Alphafold (48, 49) and PHYRE2 (64) to generate models of MpaR and Maestro (Schrödinger Suite) to perform Induced-Fit docking of PLP and PLP-CN in the MpaR binding site. (The results of this analysis are described in detail in File S1) Looking first at the full structure of MpaR, we overlaid a model of apo MpaR (generated with Alphafold) with a model of the MpaR holoenzyme (generated with PHYRE2 using PLP-bound PdxR as a template). This overlay indicates that binding of PLP and/or PLP-CN converts an alpha helix present in the apo form into a loop in the holo form. This helix/loop is preceded by a proline-rich stretch that is clustered near F114, the side chain of which faces the PLP/PLP-CN binding pocket. Related to this, our Induced-Fit docking analysis indicates a stronger binding of MpaR to PLP-CN than to PLP and that several shifts occur in the predicted interactions of side chain residues that face the binding site when PLP docking is compared to that of PLP-CN, including in those predicted for K314 (Fig. 7C and D) and F203. In particular, F203 forms a stronger interaction with the cyanohydrin form, which could cause a conformational change in F114 that is transduced to the proline-rich region and ultimately the DNA-binding domain. Although organisms that produce cyanide, which include plants, fungi, cyanobacteria, and soil and plant-associated bacteria, risk self-poisoning, they can also benefit from its toxicity to predatory, pathogenic, or competing organisms (53, 65–68). P. aeruginosa cyanide production, which can yield concentrations of more than 100 µM [substantially higher than the level needed to kill eukaryotic cells (17, 69)], contributes to its interspecies competitive fitness and its pathogenicity and may also contribute to intraspecies, population-level fitness (70–74). Studies in plants and animals have also highlighted other physiological effects of cyanide production (75), including roles in regulation. Cyanide sensing in plant proteins may occur via chemical modification of cysteine (76), and although other bacterial cyanide-sensing proteins have yet to be identified, a few structures showing the effect of cyanide on ligand binding have been solved (77–79). Our findings suggest a new mechanism of cyanide-dependent control of gene expression in a cyanide-producing, pathogenic bacterium that could be targeted in therapeutic approaches that weaken P. aeruginosa’s self-resistance and toxicity. Moreover, our results point to a possible strategy for the quantification of cyanide that relies on PLP-binding transcription factors, which could be exploited in diverse industrial settings (80–82).