Discussion In this study we have identified two proteins, Ssp1 and Ssp2, as true (non-structural) secreted substrates of the S. marcescens T6SS and confirmed them as new T6SS-dependent antibacterial toxins. We have also demonstrated, genetically and biochemically, that the highly specific, cognate periplasmic immunity proteins, Rap1a and Rap2a, efficiently neutralize the effect of the Ssp proteins. The atomic structures of two other, related Rap proteins reveal that the immunity proteins should exhibit a novel protein fold likely only attained when they are present in the periplasm. Our examination of Ssp1 and Ssp2 suggested that they represented novel antibacterial toxins, containing a domain of unknown function, DUF4285, present in prokaryotic and eukaryotic proteins. We were unable to detect significant sequence similarity with well-known peptidoglycan hydrolases and the structure prediction program Phyre2 (Kelley and Sternberg, 2009) was unable to assign them any peptidoglycan hydrolase-like structure. Nevertheless, as they are clearly periplasmic-acting toxins (Fig. 5) and non-resistant mutants showed apparent lytic and/or division defects (Figs 3A and S2), a cell wall targeting function seemed most likely. This idea has very recently been strongly supported by the observation that related proteins exhibit peptidoglycan amidase activity in vitro (see below; Russell et al., 2012). Importantly, through analysing secreted Ssp2 isolated from culture supernatant, we have also shown for the first time that T6-secreted effectors are not processed at either terminus during secretion. It seems clear that Ssp1 and Ssp2 are not the only effector proteins secreted by the S. marcescens T6SS. First, Ssp mutants are still able to kill Pseudomonas fluorescens as effectively as wild type Db10 (Fig. S4), implying that other toxins secreted in their absence are sufficient to maintain efficient antibacterial killing. Additionally, the susceptibility of the ΔT6SS mutant to self-targeting by the wild type strain is greater than that of the Δrap,ssp mutant (Fig. 1A), implying additional immunity proteins and thus cognate secreted toxins within the T6SS gene cluster. Moreover, the magnitude of killing of the ΔT6SS mutant by wild type Db10 is less than that observed during T6-dependent killing of other organisms (Murdoch et al., 2011; Fig. S4), suggesting that additional secreted toxins (and cognate immunity proteins) are encoded elsewhere in the genome. Indeed, our unpublished work has identified four other, unrelated, candidate substrates of the Serratia T6SS. Hence, we believe that S. marcescens uses a species-specific arsenal of secreted toxins to produce the potent and efficient targeting of a variety of competitor bacteria observed (Murdoch et al., 2011). Our work provides strong functional evidence for a new family of related T6SS substrates (Ssp1 and Ssp2 homologues) and family of related immunity proteins (Rap homologues) found in many different bacterial species and generally encoded within a main T6SS gene cluster of that organism. Ssp- and Rap-like proteins are found associated with a subset of T6SSs (some, but not all, closely related to the S. marcescens T6SS), but whether these T6SSs all exhibit antibacterial activity remains to be determined. While this report was in preparation, a bioinformatic study identified four disparate families of predicted T6-secreted peptidoglycan amidases, with Tse1 of P. aeruginosa being a member of ‘Family 1’ (Russell et al., 2012). Entirely consistent with our data, Ssp-like proteins were recognized as one of these families, ‘Family 4’. A related family of proposed cognate immunity proteins identified as co-occurring with all Ssp/Family 4 proteins is of course the Rap family proteins. Thus, in the nomenclature proposed by Russell et al., Ssp1 and Ssp2 could be classified as Tae4.1SM and Tae4.2SM, and Rap1a and Rap2a as Tai4.1aSM and Tai4.2aSM. Unlike Families 1–3, the Family 4/Ssp proteins are almost unrecognizable as peptidoglycan amidases at a sequence and structure prediction level. Nevertheless, the purified Ssp homologue STM0277 from Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium was able to hydrolyse peptidoglycan cross-links at the D-Glu-mDAP bond of the acceptor stem (Russell et al., 2012). Additionally, artificial expression and targeting of STM0277 to the periplasm was shown to be toxic to E. coli, with rescue by coexpression of the Rap homologue STM0278. However, studies were not conducted to show that STM0277 is a T6SS substrate or that it plays a role in T6-mediated antibacterial activity, neither was a role for STM0278 in self-resistance in the native, T6-elaborating organism investigated. In contrast, we have provided the comprehensive genetic, in vivo and biochemical data necessary to confirm that Ssp/Family 4 proteins are indeed a novel family of T6-secreted antibacterial toxins and moreover that the Rap family contains the cognate immunity proteins. Interestingly, it was recently reported that a mutant in the above Rap2a homologue in S. Typhimurium, STM0278, had a defect in replication in macrophages (Mulder et al., 2012). The reason behind this is not clear, but it may reflect the fact that this mutant has reduced fitness due to self-toxicity, just as we have shown for the Δrap2a mutant. It should also be noted that Ssp–Rap pairs are not always found associated with T6SS genes. A particularly interesting example is the location of such a pair almost adjacent to genes encoding a classical RelE–RelB toxin–antitoxin pair (T-AT; Yamaguchi and Inouye, 2011) on a plasmid in Acinetobacter baumannii (Fig. 1). It is tempting to speculate that an original source of T6 toxin/resistance pairs is from plasmid T-AT systems. The work of Russell et al. (2012) combined with our demonstration that Ssp1 and Ssp2 function as periplasmic-acting toxins is highly consistent with these proteins having a peptidoglycan amidase enzymatic activity. Of particular note, conserved Cys and His residues predicted by Russell et al. to represent the catalytic amino acids mediating peptidoglycan amide bond hydrolysis can be readily identified in Ssp1 and Ssp2. These are Cys50 (NTCAVRMS) and His133 (GHIDLIEP) in Ssp1, and Cys50 (NACAIRMS) and His131 in Ssp2 (GHATLWNG), with the equivalent, conserved regions in STM0277 being (NACPIRMS and GHVTLWNG). However, crucially, our data on the Ssp and Rap proteins in the context of T6SS-mediated attack and defence in vivo reveal that the situation is more subtle than this. In particular, Ssp1 and Ssp2 are clearly not redundant, despite having the same postulated enzymatic function. Rather, they have distinct activities or roles, with Ssp2 apparently more potent. In particular, we noted that the Ssp-dependent morphological phenotypes of the Δrap1a and Δrap2a mutants are different (Figs 3A and S2), that toxicity in the E. coli periplasm is only medium-dependent for Ssp1 (Fig. 5), and that the two may be relevant in different biological contexts (e.g. Ssp1 does not significantly contribute to self-targeting under the conditions of our standard assay, yet is clearly required for the self-toxicity observed in a Δrap1a mutant). This specialization is consistent with a clear specificity for only the cognate Ssp–Rap partner, as we observed. In the native context, it is clear that none of the other three Rap proteins can confer cross-resistance to Ssp2 in the absence of Rap2a (nor did Ssp2 interact with Rap1a biochemically). The molecular basis for the difference between Ssp1 and Ssp2, which share 24% sequence identity, is not yet clear and will require further study, including determination of in vitro enzymatic activity and atomic structures. The S. marcescens Rap proteins represent founder members of a new bacterial protein family, members of which represent immunity proteins for T6-secreted toxins, as exemplified by Rap1a and Rap2a. We have determined the structures of two members of this family, Rap1b and Rap2b, revealing a new protein fold. Given the sequence homology, conservation of key residues and shared predicted secondary structure throughout all members of the family (Fig. 7; Russell et al., 2012), this fold appears to be shared across members from different organisms. A conserved disulphide bond and the observed stable dimerization interface, together with canonical N-terminal signal sequences, are consistent with a periplasmic localization for all Rap family proteins. To date, the structures of two other T6 immunity proteins have been solved. The first is the cytoplasmic Tsi2 protein (Li et al., 2012; Zou et al., 2012). Like the Rap proteins, Tsi2 exhibits a helical fold, is acidic and exists as a stable dimer in solution. However, the structures of Tsi2 and the Rap proteins are unrelated. Second, and very recent, is the structure of the periplasmic Tsi1 protein, complexed with the secreted peptidoglycan hydrolase effector, Tse1 (Ding et al., 2012). Tse1 possesses a strikingly accessible active site, facilitating its promiscuous and toxic peptidoglycan amidase activity (Chou et al., #b1001). Tsi1 binds to Tse1 in a 1:1 complex, occluding the substrate-binding site of Tse1 in order to neutralize its activity (Ding et al., 2012). Critically, although the Rap1a/Rap2a proteins and Tsi1 both mediate resistance to peptidoglycan hydrolase toxins, their structures now appear to be entirely unrelated. Tsi1 exhibits an all β fold, related to a classical β-propeller, whereas Rap family proteins exhibit a novel helical fold. This indicates that the mechanisms by which immunity proteins confer resistance may be divergent even among those with effectors of similar function. Rap1a and Rap2a have an obvious immunity phenotype specific to their cognate secreted toxins, Ssp1 and Ssp2. However, the role of Rap1b and Rap2b is not yet known. While they do not appear to play a role in self-resistance, they may play a role in resistance towards closely related bacteria secreting similar toxins. It is worth noting that other organisms also possess multiple Rap family proteins for a given Ssp family protein (Fig. 1C and data not shown); therefore, whatever the function of Rap1b and 2b turns out to be, it may not be unique to Serratia. Complementing our genetic and phenotypic demonstration of the cognate toxin-immunity function of Ssp1–Rap1a and Ssp2–Rap2a, we report detailed biochemical characterization of the interactions between these purified T6-secreted toxins and immunity proteins. For efficient self-protection, these interactions should be tight and highly specific, as was observed. Formation of Ssp1–Rap1a and Ssp2–Rap2a complexes is exothermic, with low nanomolar Kd, and with a stoichiometry of 2:2. A binding affinity of this order agrees well with the Kd of 3 nM reported for the Tsi1–Tse1 interaction (Ding et al., 2012); however, the Tsi1–Tse1 complex has a stoichiometry of 1:1, again highlighting significant differences between different pairs of toxin-immunity proteins. The structure of a Ssp–Rap complex and arrangement of the subunits has yet to be determined, although it is likely that the two Ssp proteins bind to the same part of each Rap monomer, exploiting the twofold symmetry. Li et al. suggest that Tse2 interacts with an acidic patch on Tsi2 distal to the dimer interface (Li et al., 2012). They also note that, like many toxin–antitoxin pairs, the resistance proteins Tsi1–3 are more acidic than the toxin proteins Tse1–3. This pattern is strikingly followed with the Ssp (theoretical pI 9) and Rap (theoretical pI 5–6) proteins. Nevertheless, while the highly acidic Rap proteins bind their cognate Ssp partners, which are noticeably basic, with high affinity, the story is not as simple as charge complementarity. Surprisingly for proteins with such low pI values, the striking surface feature conserved in Rap1b and Rap2b structures is a crescent-shaped basic patch on either side of the dimer (Fig. 6C and D). It is possible that such a basic crescent, if present on toxin-binding Rap proteins, may contribute to orientation of the partner during binding; conversely, it might contribute to the lack of Ssp binding by Rap1b and Rap2b. Additionally, all four S. marcescens Rap proteins are acidic and both Ssp proteins basic, yet only two, highly specific interactions are observed (Rap1a–Ssp1 and Rap2a–Ssp2). While charge complementarity would be expected to be important for specific complex formation, it is likely that shape considerations play an equally important role. The structure of a toxin-immunity protein complex will be necessary to delineate the molecular features that govern specific Rap–Ssp association. We are working towards that goal. In summary, our data support a model (Fig. 8) whereby Ssp1 and Ssp2 are toxins secreted by the S. marcescens T6SS into the periplasm of a neighbouring cell. If this is an isogenic sibling, the cognate Rap proteins provide an efficient protective barrier, effectively binding and sequestering the toxin, whereas if it is a competitor, Ssp1/2 are free to attack the cell wall. However, Ssp1 and Ssp2 are only two of multiple distinct T6-secreted toxins. This provides the observed redundancy of function: if Ssp1/2 are missing, the other toxins still cause the efficient death of a competitor. This ‘belt and braces’ approach provides great robustness: if a competitor becomes resistant to one or two toxins, the others will still provide the ability to kill or inhibit the competitor efficiently. Of course, the toxic effect of Ssp1/2 can be seen against self (if the cognate Rap is missing) as Db10 has resistance proteins to neutralize the other toxins. We believe that other effectors most likely act on different cellular targets, analogous to the Pseudomonas-specific, cytoplasmic-acting toxin, Tse2 (Li et al., 2012). Finally, we speculate that as the Ssp and Rap proteins are encoded within the T6SS gene cluster, and related genes are found associated with other T6SSs, particularly closely related ones, they may represent the ancestral substrates of the S. marcescens T6SS. Subsequently, other toxins could have been horizontally acquired from diverse sources and adopted by this highly versatile secretion machine. The exciting task of deciphering how such species- and strain-specific arsenals of toxins and immunity proteins are co-ordinated by the producing cell and how they contribute to the dynamic composition of polymicrobial communities in infection and the environment lies ahead. Fig. 8Model for action and context of Ssp and Rap proteins.A. Wild type S. marcescens Db10 uses its T6SS to inject multiple different antibacterial toxins (solid circles), including Ssp2 (green), into a susceptible target competitor cell, cumulatively causing a rapid death. Ssp2 attacks the cell wall in the periplasm (peri); other toxins are likely to attack targets in the cytoplasm (cyto).B. Another wild type cell is resistant to T6SS attack by its neighbour because of the presence of cognate immunity proteins for all the toxins (open circles). Rap2a dimers (purple) form a protective barrier in the periplasm, rapidly binding and sequestering Ssp2.C. When a Δrap2a mutant of Db10 is the target strain, all of the effectors except for Ssp2 are still neutralized, but Ssp2 secreted by wild type cells is now able to cause toxicity in the target.D. In a putative ancestral cell, T6SS secretion of Ssp2, but not other toxins later acquired by horizontal transfer, inhibits a competitor target cell. In this case, loss of Ssp2 (or resistance to Ssp2 in the target) would prevent inhibition.For clarity, Ssp1 and Rap1a are not shown but would behave similarly to Ssp2 and Rap2a. Model for action and context of Ssp and Rap proteins. A. Wild type S. marcescens Db10 uses its T6SS to inject multiple different antibacterial toxins (solid circles), including Ssp2 (green), into a susceptible target competitor cell, cumulatively causing a rapid death. Ssp2 attacks the cell wall in the periplasm (peri); other toxins are likely to attack targets in the cytoplasm (cyto). B. Another wild type cell is resistant to T6SS attack by its neighbour because of the presence of cognate immunity proteins for all the toxins (open circles). Rap2a dimers (purple) form a protective barrier in the periplasm, rapidly binding and sequestering Ssp2. C. When a Δrap2a mutant of Db10 is the target strain, all of the effectors except for Ssp2 are still neutralized, but Ssp2 secreted by wild type cells is now able to cause toxicity in the target. D. In a putative ancestral cell, T6SS secretion of Ssp2, but not other toxins later acquired by horizontal transfer, inhibits a competitor target cell. In this case, loss of Ssp2 (or resistance to Ssp2 in the target) would prevent inhibition. For clarity, Ssp1 and Rap1a are not shown but would behave similarly to Ssp2 and Rap2a.