Discussion The objective of this paper was to review the biodiversity of anti-microbial compounds, their mode(s) of action and underlying biosynthetic genes within plant associated microbes. This review covered diverse biosynthetic gene clusters that encode polyketides, non-ribosomal peptides, terpenoids, alkaloids, heterocyclic nitrogenous compounds, volatile compounds, bacteriocins, and lytic enzymes. The reviewed evidence suggests that these biosynthetic genes have diversified at different orders, each based on distinct evolutionary mechanisms: Species level diversification An emerging theme from the literature is that horizontal gene transfer (HGT) appears to have played a major role in the evolutionary diversification of plant-associated microbial species through inheritance of anti-microbial traits. There is evidence that HGT may have occurred from: bacteria to bacteria such as those that inhabit the rhizosphere (e.g., phenazine); from bacteria to fungi (e.g., helvolic acid); from bacteria to nematodes and arthropods (e.g., chitinase family 19); possibly from fungi to plants (e.g., Taxol); from plants to bacteria (e.g., phenazine and chitinase family 19); and even from higher eukaryotes to bacteria (e.g., IleS, pseudomonic acid resistance protein) (Figure 8). As noted in the literature, diverse factors might have facilitated these remarkable gene transfer events including: (1) the clustering of genes encoding the secondary metabolite; (2) homologous recombination between chromosomes and trans-conjugated plasmids (e.g., phenazine, zwittermicin A); (3) the presence of mobile elements (DNA transposons and retroelements) flanking the biosynthetic operons (e.g., zwittermicin A, phenazine and ergovaline); and (4) the presence of genes that encode self-immunity to the antibiotic within the biosynthetic cluster as otherwise receiving the cluster would have caused immediate suicide (e.g., mupirocin). It is worth noting that some gene clusters show no evidence of HGT (e.g., hydrogen cyanide). Figure 8Potential examples of horizontal gene transfer of anti-microbial gene clusters leading to species level evolutionary diversification. Potential examples of horizontal gene transfer of anti-microbial gene clusters leading to species level evolutionary diversification. Genome level diversification A second emerging theme from the literature is that a subset of associated plant- associated microbial genomes have diversified with respect to duplications of entire gene clusters responsible for the synthesis of antimicrobial compounds. For example, as noted above, in Neotyphodium uncinatum, there are two homologous gene clusters that encode loline, LOL-1 and LOL-2, the likely result of a segmental duplication event within this fungus. Another noted example is from Bacillus species in which three tandemly duplicated gene clusters, pks1, pks2, and pks3, encode the polyketides, bacillaene, macrolactin, and difficidin, respectively, the likely result of a homologous recombination event. Intra gene cluster diversification A third interesting theme from the literature is that gene clusters encoding anti-microbial compounds have extensively diversified within, to permit biochemical diversification. The biosynthetic genes for these compounds are clustered in fungi or organized into operons in bacteria—in the latter, they are generally located on chromosomes but occasionally on plasmids (e.g., agrocin 84). Diversity within each cluster can include varying combinations of biosynthetic coding sequences (CDS), transporters for the respective compound, regulatory genes and CDS that confer self-immunity (e.g., mupirocin, agrocin 84). The biosynthetic operons vary in how many CDS synthesize the core skeleton (e.g., synthetases) as well as in how many encode decoration enzymes (e.g., hydroxylases, acyltransferases). However, the decoration enzymes may be encoded outside the gene cluster (e.g., phenazine operon). Furthermore, the biosynthetic CDS may be organized into genetic modules (e.g., NRPS) that vary in number. Each gene cluster is also associated with distinct DNA regulatory elements, for example to receive signals such as from quorum sensing. For example, comparative analysis of the trichothecene biosynthetic gene clusters (TRI) in Fusarium and Trichoderma showed multiple evolutionary diversification events within a single biosynthetic gene cluster family (e.g., head-to-tail vs. head-to-head rearrangements) (Figure 5). In another example, comparative analyses of the polymyxin operon showed mixing and matching of CDS, resulting in diversification of the compounds. Similarly, diversification of the phenazines likely arose through a diversity of biosynthetic decoration enzymes (e.g., hydroxylases). Another intriguing observation is from the helvolic acid biosynthetic gene cluster, in which transferase CDS were shown to have duplicated and diversified into paralogous gene families. As noted above, an interesting feature of this gene cluster is that it located in the sub-telomere chromosome region which is associated with high rates of evolutionary recombination. Diversification within coding sequences (CDS) A final emerging theme from the literature is that diversification of anti-microbial traits in plant-associated microbes arose from allelic diversification. For example, intragenic swapping of domains was observed within the same genetic module (e.g., iturin A, mycosubtilins). As another example, whereas most chitinase genes possess a single catalytic domain, examples were noted where a single CDS encodes two catalytic domains (Figure 7). In general, the literature notes that domains within the same CDS can evolve independently (e.g., catalytic vs. substrate binding domains of chitinase); combined with the existence of linker peptides between domains as sites of homologous recombination, these features can result in novel alleles following domain swapping (e.g., family18 chitinases). Whereas, such allelic diversification plays a major role in the diversification of compound structures, caused for example by DNA mutations within the substrate binding domain, the literature demonstrates examples where biochemical diversity has arisen from relaxed substrate specificity of the biosynthetic enzymes (Figure 3). A representative example of the latter is the promiscuous fusaricidin NRPS in which the same recognition domain in different species can recognize and incorporate different amino acids, and furthermore it can recognize amino acids beyond the 21 standard amino acids translated by the ribosome, which results in significant structural diversity. Dynamic evolutionary driven by selection pressures It is interesting to speculate on the evolutionary selection pressures that have led to the diversification at the various biological levels noted above. At the most basic level, diversification was likely driven by a three-way co-evolution between the plant-associated microbe, its target pathogen and the host plant. This co-evolution may have occurred within a specific plant tissue niche or within soil associated with the rhizosphere (e.g., phenazine and PLt to combat soil-borne pathogens). However, there is also evidence for four-way interactions, to also include additional microbes (e.g., Taxol, jadomycin) and insects (e.g., ergovaline). These complex interactions can be bi-directional (e.g., loline). Within the producing organism, there is evidence for selection pressure to coordinate biosynthesis of the anti-microbial compound with the life cycle of the microbe (e.g., fusaricidins). There may also have been selection for genetic efficiency (e.g., potential sharing of transporter genes between polymyxin and fusaricidin). These selection pressures have led to fascinating individual stories, including the evolution of mimicry to facilitate antibiosis (e.g., agrocin).