Discussion The uridyl peptide antibiotics consist of mureidomycin, napsamycin, pacidamycin and sansanmycin. Acting as MraY inhibitors, they are promising compounds for the development of new anti-Pseudomonas and anti-mycobacterial agents6. Comparison of the gene clusters for the biosynthesis of these uridyl peptide antibiotics showed that organization of genes in cluster of napsamycin/mureidomycin and sansanmycin has a striking resemblance, while the genetic organization of the pacidamycin gene cluster is different12. It is noteworthy that there are two putative regulatory genes (npsA and npsM) in napsamycin gene cluster, while only one regulatory gene (pacA or ssaA) was found in pacidamycin or sansanmycin gene cluster. Among them, only ssaA was investigated and characterized as an activator gene for sansanmycin production in Streptomyces sp. strain SS9. Base on the fact that NpsA and PacA are highly homologous to SsaA (Supplementary Fig. S2), npsA and pacA are predicted to function as activator gene in the biosynthesis of napsamycin and pacidamycin, respectively. However, function of npsM remains unknown. In this study, we deleted SSGG_02978, a npsM homologue, in S. roseosporus NRRL 15998. Analysis of the deletion mutant revealed that SSGG_02978 has no effect on mureidomycin production. It seems that SSGG_02978 or npsM is not involved in mureidomycin/napsamycin production. For activation of cryptic gene clusters, a simple strategy is to overexpress or delete cluster-situated regulators (CSRs) encoded by genes within the gene cluster of interest. If the activator gene is not transcribed under routine laboratory conditions, activation of the cryptic gene cluster can be achieved simply by constitutive expression of the activator gene16. In our case, the activator gene SSGG_02995 is transcribed at a fairly low level in the WT strain and it is not functional even after its overexpression in Sros-h02995 (Figs 2a and 4). Under these circumstances, it is necessary to evaluate activators from other gene clusters, especially those required for the biosynthesis of structurally similar antibiotics. Sometimes, it is even more complicated. Activation of cryptic gene cluster requires expression of a functional pleiotropic or global regulator. Activation of secondary metabolites produced by a cryptic gene cluster in Streptomyces calvus requires expression of a functional copy of bldA20, which encode the only tRNA capable of translating the leucine codon UUA. We have successfully activated a silent mureidomycin biosynthetic gene cluster in S. roseosporus NRRL 15998 by constitutive expression of ssaA from Streptomyces sp. strain SS. Surprisingly, constitutive expression of SSGG_02995, a native ssaA homologue, failed to activate mureidomycin production in S. roseosporus NRRL 15998 (Fig. 2a). SSGG02995 and its orthologues contain an N-terminal fork head-associated (FHA) domain and a C-terminal LuxR-type helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif. Further examination of SSGG02995 in S. roseosporus NRRL 15998 showed that variations were mainly found in the FHA domain of SSGG02995, while the DBD domain remains essentially the same (Supplementary Fig. S2). It is plausible that SSGG02995 lost the ability to activate mureidomycin production due to amino acid substitutions in its FHA domain. This may explain why the mureidomycin biosynthetic gene cluster remains silent in several well-developed surrogate hosts. However, the regulatory mechanism of the aberrant SSGG02995 remains unknown. We have identified eight acetylated mureidomycin analogues. Previous study suggested that NpsB, an N-acetyltransferase, is responsible for the formation of N-acetylmureidomycin B from mureidomycin B and acetyl-CoA12. In this study, the expression of SSGG_02979, a npsB homologue in S. roseosporus NRRL 15998, was increased significantly in Sros-hA. We therefore speculated that SSGG_02979 is responsible for the accumulation of acetylated mureidomycin analogues in S. roseosporus NRRL 15998. The N-acetylation reaction was proposed to contribute to a self-resistance of napsamycin in the producer strain12, and similar N-acetyltransferase-mediated reaction was reported to be responsible for self-resistance to the antimicrobial peptide edeine of Brevibacillus brevis Vm421. However, the role of acetylation in mureidomycin self-resistance remains elusive until further experimental validation. Moreover, the substrate promiscuity of NRPSs was observed with variations at AA4 and/or AA5 of mureidomycin (Fig. 7). Similar observations were also found at different amino acid positions in the biosynthesis of pacidamycin and sansanmycin2223. The substrate promiscuity of NRPSs is responsible for the diversity of these uridyl peptide antibiotics. It can also be explored for the generation of novel analogues by precursor-directed biosynthesis2223. With the activation of mureidomycin biosynthetic gene cluster in S. roseosporus NRRL 15998, the same strategy could be used for generation of novel mureidomycin analogues, and systematic structure–activity relationship (SAR) studies can be carried out to evaluate their biological activities thereafter. If necessary, the NRPSs may be engineered to have a preference for amino acid substrates which can be incorporated to produce mureidomycin analogues with improved anti-Pseudomonas activity.