Discussion The N. crassa aod-1 gene encodes an AOX, called AOD1, which is able to transfer electrons directly from ubiquinol to molecular oxygen. Standard lab strains of N. crassa contain very low levels of aod-1 mRNA when grown under non-inducing conditions (Tanton et al. 2003; Chae et al. 2007b; Qi et al. 2017). These levels increase several fold when cells are grown in inducing conditions, such as in the presence of inhibitors that decrease the function of the standard electron transport chain, or if cells contain mutations affecting the function of the standard chain. Here, we have addressed the previous observation that strain T1P11 contained high levels of aod-1 transcript even in non-inducing conditions (Descheneau et al. 2005). Analysis of whole genome sequences of T1P11, a standard laboratory strain expressing low levels of aod-1 transcript in non-inducing conditions (NCN233), and six progeny derived from a cross of these two strains revealed mutations in two genes, kin-9 (NCU05180) and flbA (NCU08319), that might be responsible for the phenotype. Both of these mutations were present in all high expressing strains and no low expressing strains. Further analysis provided no evidence supporting the involvement of the kin-9 gene mutations in the phenotype. However, several observations supported the hypothesis that the frameshift mutation identified in the flbA gene is responsible for the high level of aod-1 transcripts under non-inducing conditions. First, the frameshift occurs early in the gene and would result in loss of the conserved functional domains that are predicted in the protein. Second, levels of aod-1 mRNA were also found to be high in the ΔflbA strains from the N. crassa single gene deletion library when grown in non-inducing conditions. Third, based on the function of both the RGS protein encoded by flbA and the Gα protein GNA1, with which it interacts, we observed the predicted decrease in aod-1 mRNA in a strain carrying a deletion of the gna-1 gene when grown under inducing conditions. Finally, a transcriptome study in an A. niger designed to assess the affects of a deletion of flbA on spatial gene expression found that transcripts from the AOX encoding gene aox-1 were upregulated (Krijgsheld and Wösten 2013). To our knowledge there have been no detailed studies on the role of the FLBA protein in N. crassa. However, initial analysis of flbA deletion mutants as part of the N. crassa genome project revealed that the strains had an abnormal growth pattern on plates at 37°, the morphology of protoperithecia was altered, and mature perithecia were not formed (http://fungidb.org/). The role of the N. crassa gene has also been considered as part of a network required for perithecial development in filamentous fungi in an evolutionary context (Trail et al. 2017). We have confirmed that the flbA frameshift identified in our study results in a growth phenotype similar to the deletion strains (Figure S4). The function of the flbA gene has been studied more extensively in the Aspergillus species A. niger, A. nidulans, and A. fumigatus. Deletion flbA strains were found to have uncontrolled growth, inability to form conidiophores, and to accumulate undifferentiated aerial hyphae that are subject to autolysis (Lee and Adams 1994; Wieser et al. 1994; Yu et al. 1996). Changes in the production of secondary metabolites (Hicks et al. 1997; Aerts et al. 2018) and in the secretome (Krijgsheld et al. 2013) have also been described. The transcriptome study that revealed the up regulation of AOX transcripts in the flbA mutant also identified twofold or greater changes in expression of 1152 different genes, including 38 that were predicted to encode transcription factors (Krijgsheld and Wösten 2013). However, the A. nidulans orthologs of AOD2 and AOD5 were not among the transcription factors with altered expression. Deletion of flbA in A. fumigatus has been found to have effects on a number of processes, including increased expression of the GliT protein (Shin and Yu 2013; Shin et al. 2013), which is required for both synthesis and self resistance to gliotoxin (Schrettl et al. 2010). In addition, an increase in expression of catalase and an increase in intracellular activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) were noted. These proteins play a role in coping with reactive oxygen species (ROS). Furthermore, an A. fumigatus strain expressing a constitutively active GpaA (the ortholog of the A. nidulans Gα protein FadA), also had higher expression of the catalase encoding genes cat1 and cat2 (Shin and Yu 2013), supporting the notion that the effects seen in the flbA deletion strain are mediated via the G protein signaling system. These observations led to the proposal that the FlbA protein and a G protein regulatory circuit are involved in signaling that affects the cell’s response to reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Shin and Yu 2013). Interestingly, AOX has also been shown to have a role in responding to ROS in many fungi, especially in pathogenic species where ROS are generated as a defense mechanism by the host (Yukioka et al. 1998; Akhter et al. 2003; Magnani et al. 2008; Ruiz et al. 2011; Cárdenas-Monroy et al. 2017). Conceivably, AOX may be another factor in an overall G protein regulatory circuit that responds to ROS in such fungi. However, it seems unlikely that ROS are involved in activating a similar system in N. crassa, since strains expressing constitutively active GNA1 protein have increased sensitivity to oxidative stress (Yang and Borkovich 1999). Our findings that the knockout of gna-1 has decreased levels of aod-1 mRNA in inducing conditions, while the flbA mutation gives rise to increased expression in non-inducing conditions, argues that a classic G protein signaling pathway plays a role in aod-1 expression in N. crassa. This further implies that an extracellular signal may be influencing aod-1 expression, since the signaling pathway should be induced by an extracellular ligand binding to a GPCR. We do not know the nature of this signal, nor do we know the downstream effector that is influenced by the active GNA1 Gα protein. The most likely possibilities for the latter may be cascades involving either cAMP or mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPK) (Li et al. 2007; Won et al. 2012). One gene identified in an A. fumigatus flbA deletion study suggests a link to the expression of AOX encoding genes in various fungi. The acuF gene, which encodes phophoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK), a key gluconeogenic enzyme, was found to be upregulated in the flbA deletion strain (Shin et al. 2013). In A. nidulans, expression of acuF is known to require the transcription factors AcuK and AcuM, which are also required for transcription of the AOX encoding gene (aodA) (Suzuki et al. 2012). AcuK and AcuM are the orthologs of N. crassa AOD2 and AOD5, which are required for transcription of both aod-1 and the gene encoding PEPCK (acu-6) in N. crassa (Chae et al. 2007b; Qi et al. 2017). Similarly, expression of the genes encoding PEPCK and AOX in Podospora anserina requires the orthologs of AOD2 and AOD5 (Bovier et al. 2014). Thus, it is conceivable that one of the effects mediated by the active Gα protein results is the activation of the AOD2 and AOD5 transcription factors (or their orthologs). Is the G protein signaling system entirely responsible for the upregulation of aod-1 transcription in inducing conditions? Although our measurements of aod-1 transcript levels, especially in highly expressing strains, were subject to variation, we generally observed less aod-1 mRNA in uninduced flbA mutant strains than in induced wild type strains. In addition, more aod-1 transcript was present when we examined flbA mutants grown under inducing conditions compared to the same strain in non-inducing condtions (Figure 1 and Descheneau et al. 2005). These observations could be interpreted as a second signaling system playing an additive role under inducing conditions, but could also reflect a fuller activation of the G protein system in inducing conditions. However, the observation that the Δgna-1 strain, grown under inducing conditions, still contains significantly more aod-1 transcript than uninduced wild type strains (Figure 5), argues for a second system of transcriptional control in addition to that using the Gα protein GNA1. As stated above, we have noted variation in aod-1 transcript levels in high expressing strains as shown by the range of values and larger error bars (Figure 1). One possible explanation for this observation relates to the spatial transcriptome study in the ΔflbA mutant strain of A. niger (Krijgsheld and Wösten 2013). Transcript levels were measured in three different concentric zones of colony growth on agar plates: zone 1 was the oldest, central-most zone, zone 3 was the intermediate zone, and zone 5 was the youngest, most peripheral zone. The level of upregulation of aox1 varied between zones. In the central zone, the expression of aox1 was increased about sixfold over wild-type, in the intermediate zone expression was almost ninefold higher and at the periphery of growth about 19 fold higher than wild type. The cultures from which RNA was extracted for our qPCR analysis of aod-1 transcript levels, were liquid cultures. Typically, the total culture amounted to about 8 g wet weight when harvested, but only 100 mg from these cultures was used for RNA extraction. The larger culture would consist of both young hyphal regions at growing tips as well as older regions where growth had initiated. There was no distinction between such regions used for RNA extraction. If a pattern of expression relating to age of the mycelium exists in N. crassa, as it does in A. niger, then simple random sampling may have played a role in generating the variability due to different ages of the mycelia that were taken. We previously noted that the higher level of aod-1 transcripts in uninduced cultures of strain T1P11 do not give rise to detectable AOD1 protein (Descheneau et al. 2005). Here we have shown that this is usually the case, but such cultures may occasionally contain low levels of AOD1 protein. However, even in such cases, the levels of protein detected were much lower than the amount predicted based on transcript levels when compared to induced wild type cells. This argues for the existence of a post-transcriptional control mechanism that responds to inducing conditions to allow translation of the message. Since the G protein signal resulting in increased transcription of aod-1 under non-inducing conditions in flbA mutants does not give rise to efficient translation of the message, this implies that an additional signal, produced under inducing conditions, is required for translation. In summary, our results support the view that there are at least three systems of control for production of the AOD1 AOX protein in N. crassa (Figure 7). Two systems appear to activate aod-1 transcription. One is a G protein regulatory circuit that responds to an unknown signal produced when the function of the standard electron transport chain in mitochondria is compromised. Since the gna-1 deletion strain grown under inducing conditions contains more aod-1 transcript than uninduced wild type strains, this implies the existence of a second transcriptional regulatory system that also responds to a signal produced when the standard electron transport chain is compromised. Finally, since the excess aod-1 mRNA produced under non-inducing conditions in mutant flbA strains is not efficiently translated, it appears there is a system for activation of translation of aod-1 mRNA, which is also generated when the standard electron transport chain is compromised. Further investigation will be aimed at the nature of the signaling molecules and the interplay between the different systems of control. Figure 7Summary of control of AOX production in N. crassa. The heterotrimeric GαGβGγ protein is shown bound to the membrane spanning GPCR. GDP (yellow) is bound to the Gα subunit. Upon binding an unknown ligand, which could be formed in the growth medium or secreted from inside the cell during inducing conditions, GDP is exchanged for GTP (green) and Gα dissociates from the membrane and from GβGγ. In this active state Gα acts on a downstream effector, possibly giving rise to increased cAMP levels or MAPK activity. Either of these might serve to activate the AOD2/AOD5 transcription factors. In normal cells grown under non-inducing conditions, the activity of Gα would be short lived, as the RGS protein FLBA (blue) would stimulate the GTPase activity of Gα and restore it to the inactive GDP bound state. However, in the flbA mutant strains, Gα activity would persist for much longer times. A separate signal(s) arising from poorly functioning mitochondria may also directly or indirectly activate transcription via AOD/AOD5. Similarly, a signal(s) produced under inducing conditions results in the translation of aod-1 mRNA into the AOX AOD1 protein, which is then translocated into mitochondria. Summary of control of AOX production in N. crassa. The heterotrimeric GαGβGγ protein is shown bound to the membrane spanning GPCR. GDP (yellow) is bound to the Gα subunit. Upon binding an unknown ligand, which could be formed in the growth medium or secreted from inside the cell during inducing conditions, GDP is exchanged for GTP (green) and Gα dissociates from the membrane and from GβGγ. In this active state Gα acts on a downstream effector, possibly giving rise to increased cAMP levels or MAPK activity. Either of these might serve to activate the AOD2/AOD5 transcription factors. In normal cells grown under non-inducing conditions, the activity of Gα would be short lived, as the RGS protein FLBA (blue) would stimulate the GTPase activity of Gα and restore it to the inactive GDP bound state. However, in the flbA mutant strains, Gα activity would persist for much longer times. A separate signal(s) arising from poorly functioning mitochondria may also directly or indirectly activate transcription via AOD/AOD5. Similarly, a signal(s) produced under inducing conditions results in the translation of aod-1 mRNA into the AOX AOD1 protein, which is then translocated into mitochondria.