Discussion Cytosine and adenine methylation are epigenetic mechanisms to control gene expression in eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms, respectively. While adenine methylation has been largely studied in many bacterial systems and it was shown to influence crucial vital processes, such as bacterial cell cycle, only a few studies have so far been published on cytosine methylation in bacteria, mostly in Escherichia coli4,5,16,23. Years ago, some attempts to find a role for DNA methyltransferases in S. antibioticus and S. coelicolor were reported. These studies applied different compounds known to block cytosine methylation (e.g. 5-azacytidine and sinefungin), but no clear role for cytosine methylation was established35–37. Here, we demonstrate that methylation levels are modulated throughout the growth cycle in both, solid and liquid media. This result is of particular interest, since S. coelicolor transformation efficiency depends on the methylation status of exogenous DNA38–40. We also demonstrate that the hypo-methylating agent 5′-aza-2′-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) causes a delay in spore germination, aerial mycelium differentiation and sporulation in solid medium and affects growth and spore germination in liquid medium; in addition, actinorhodin production is massively impaired in both solid and liquid media; differently, undecylprodigiosin production is retarded, but the yields in the treated cultures are similar to the untreated ones. Unfortunately, our results cannot be compared to previous reports using hypo-methylating agents in Streptomyces35–37, since 5-azacytidine is incorporated into both DNA and RNA, and sinefungin is an inhibitor of SAM-dependent cytosine and adenine methyltransferase, while in our experiments we used 5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine that is only incorporated in DNA. Thus, the effect we noticed is essentially due to cytosine methylation in the genome. We demonstrate that SCO1731 codes for a cytosine methyltransferase involved in the cytosine methylation accompanying Streptomyces differentiation. In the SCO1731::Tn5062 mutant strain, cytosine methylation was reduced to 22% compared to the parental strain during the MI stage. Our results cannot rule out that other methyltransferases may be responsible for residual methylation nor that other methyltransferases may be expressed following SCO1731 activation in a cascade manner. In fact, 38 genes coding for putative methyltransferases are present in S. coelicolor genome, making this a reasonable hypothesis. Among them, SCO1731 was transcribed in MI at higher levels, when cytosine methylation is higher than in other growth stages both in liquid and solid medium. Moreover, the SCO1731::Tn5062 mutant shows the same phenotype observed in the 5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine treated cultures regarding the effect on actinorhodin production, aerial mycelium differentiation and sporulation, that resulted impaired in the SCO1731::Tn5062 mutant and the 5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine treated cultures; differently, the delay observed in undecylprodigiosin production, spore germination and growth in the 5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine treated cultures was not observed in the SCO1731::Tn5062 mutant. This further indicates that SCO1731 is not the only methyltransferase participating in the regulation of Streptomyces development. Interestingly, the complemented mutant strain restored partially the methylation levels to 70% and if on the one hand this was sufficient to restore the correct morphological development, on the other one said methylation level was not sufficient to re-establish the onset of the actinorhodin production, further supporting that some other cellular events do occur. This kind of multilevel regulation would be not far from other bacterial systems, better investigated for influence of DNA methylation on gene expression. For instance, in C. crescentus many genes are controlled by the CcrM methyltransferase and are also co-regulated by other global cell cycle regulators, demonstrating extensive cross talk between DNA adenine methylation and the complex regulatory network governing cell cycle progression12. Given that S. coelicolor undergoes a complex life cycle with two programmed cell death events, we hypothesized that the hypermethylation of genomic DNA in MI could be a signal that activates DNA cleavage in some cells leading to cell death and allowing a controlled life cycle. In E. coli, it was demonstrated that cell death occurs upon an induced cytosine hypermethylation of the genome42–44. Even if this were the case, it would still be difficult to explain how adjacent cells perceive different stimuli and follow different fates29. If this hypothesis were correct, PCD and differentiation of S. coelicolor would have to be blocked after 5-aza-dC treatment and in the SCO1731::Tn5062 mutant strain, and this is not the case. Notwithstanding, it is possible that 5-aza-dC effect is temporary and that other methyltransferases or pathways are activated in the SCO1731::Tn5062 mutant strain. An alternative hypothesis about the biological role of cytosine methylation, is that it influences gene expression, as it occurs in other systems14–16,23,45. Methylation of cytosines in eukaryotic promoters leads to repression of transcription and to an activation when it affects gene bodies45. In E. coli the absence of the dcm gene leads to a differential expression of 510 genes, i.e. two ribosomal protein genes and the drug resistance transporter gene sugE, at stationary phase14–16. Future work will be addressed to identifying SCO1731 target genes and to comparing the methylome of S. coelicolor parental and the SCO1731::Tn5062 mutant strains. Overall, this is the first report that correlates DNA cytosine methylation with differentiation in S. coelicolor and attributes a DNA methyltransferase function to the SCO1731 gene. Our results show that both, the treatment with 5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine as well as the inactivation of the SCO1731 gene, result in a strong impairment in morphological differentiation (delay in aerial mycelium and sporulation) and an impediment in actinorhodin production. Our results reveal, for the first time, that epigenetics, through methylation of cytosines, control morpho-physiological differentiation in S. coelicolor unveiling new levels of complexity of gene expression and regulation in this microorganism.