Discussion Although A. flavus is generally considered a soil-borne fungus, the differences in asexual reproductive strategy and levels of aflatoxin production between S and L morphotypes suggest that the S morphotype, producing large numbers of sclerotia and consistently toxigenic is adapted to survival in the soil, and the L morphotype, with large numbers of conidia and variable levels of aflatoxin is adapted to aerial dispersal to the phyllosphere (Cotty et al., 1994). The closest sister taxa to A. flavus are A. minisclerotigenes and A. parvisclerotigenus (Pildain et al. 2008), both of which have a morphology similar to the S morphotype. Therefore, we believe the morphology of the S morphotype is ancestral to A. flavus, and it is speculated that the two morphotypes diverged 1-3 million years ago (Ehrlich et al. 2005). To test the hypothesis that S and L morphotypes are differentially adapted to the soil and phyllosphere respectively, we sequenced the genomes of three S isolates and three L isolates and identified both structural and gene content differences that we propose play a role in differential niche adaptation. These analyses identified 191 proteins unique to the S morphotype and 82 proteins unique to the L morphotype. This is likely an undercount as our approach was conservative to avoid false positives due to misannotation. Morphotype-unique genes were present on each of the eight chromosomes, indicating acquisition was not through a single recombination or transfer event. Morphotype-unique proteins included those involved in environmental response, transcriptional regulation, post-transcriptional regulation, epigenetic regulation and metabolic potential. These differences would allow the two morphotypes to selectively respond to conditions critical to the soil and phyllosphere, which differ in nutrient availability, competition within the niches, and their ambient conditions. Morphotype-unique proteins in the S morphotype are involved in microbial competition, resilience against toxic compounds, and nutrient acquisition; these traits are advantageous for survival in the highly competitive soil environment. One of the protein families that the S morphotype gained is an antifungal protein with high amino acid similarity to the well-studied protein Pc24g00380/PAF in Penicillium chrysogenum (98% query coverage, 68% identity, e-value 4e-38; Marx et al., 1995) that has antifungal activity against diverse fungal taxa (Kaiserer et al., 2003; Galgóczy et al., 2005; Galgóczy et al., 2007; Barna et al., 2008; Galgóczy et al., 2008). Unlike the microbial diversity present in soils, the phyllosphere community consists predominantly of bacteria, with the diversity and numbers of fungi expected to be lower (Vorholt 2012); therefore the antifungal protein in the S morphotype would be more advantageous for soil fungi. In support of this, yeasts isolated from the soil have greater antagonistic activity against filamentous fungi than yeasts isolates from the phyllosphere (Hilber-Bodmer et al., 2017). Heavy metal tolerance is also important to the adaptive evolution of soil dwelling organisms (Ryan et al., 2009; Chan et al., 2016; Faddeeva-Vakhrusheva et al., 2016). S isolates have two or more additional copies of the chromate transporter family (PF02417) than L isolates, which could confer increased tolerance to chromate. In addition, the S morphotype may have gained increased resistance to antifungals by having two copies of the C-8 sterol isomerase (PF04622; ERG2 and Sigma 1 receptor-like family) in contrast to the single copy in the L morphotype. Ergosterol biosynthesis enzymes, C-8 sterol isomerase and C-14 sterol reductase, are targets for amine antifungals produced by many microbes including soil bacteria (Trejo and Bennett 1963; Vicente et al., 2003; Hull et al., 2012; Vincent et al., 2013; Sanglard 2016). In Fusarium graminearum, possession of a second copy of C-14 sterol reductase confers increased resistance to amine fungicides (Liu et al., 2011). Similarly, the additional copy of C-8 sterol isomerase in the A. flavus S morphotype may enhance resistance to antifungal compounds produced by soil microbes enabling it to compete in the soil niche. In the soil, nutrient availability is influenced by root exudates that contain organic acids, sugars and amino acids, as well as by degradation of organic matter by microorganisms (Rengel and Marschner 2005; Turner et al., 2013; Dotaniya and Meena 2015). Among the protein families that were gained in the S morphotype were a pyruvate phosphate dikinase and a lactate dehydrogenase encoded by adjacent genes, which could allow the fungus to take advantage of diverse carbon sources in the soil. Lactate dehydrogenase catalyzes the conversion of L-lactate to pyruvate, and pyruvate phosphate dikinase phosphorylates pyruvate to produce phosphoenolpyruvate. These two enzymes could allow the S morphotype to perform gluconeogenesis from lactate to utilize organic acids in the soil as an energy source. Although the soil may have more available carbon sources compared to the phyllsophere, iron is a scarce nutrient due to lack of mobility (Rengel and Marschner 2005). Therefore, iron acquisition strategies independent of siderophore scavenging are adaptive traits that support adequate iron uptake in soil (Mathew et al., 2014; Zhu et al., 2016). Although both morphotypes have siderophore genes (data not shown), only the S morphotype has a heme oxygenase, which catalyzes the release of iron from heme providing increased capacity to competitively acquire iron. In contrast to the S morphotype, we hypothesize the L morphotype is adapted to the phyllosphere, which is protected by a cuticle layer that limits diffusion of compounds and thus is scarce in nutrients (Schönherr and Baur 1996; Lindow and Brandl 2003; Bringel and Couée 2015). In epiphytic bacteria, the ability to scavenge for limited substrates has been implicated in adaptation to the phyllosphere and their metagenomes contain a prominence of transporter genes (Delmotte et al., 2009). Similarly, L morphotype genomes have a significant GO term enrichment of amino acid transporters as well as an expansion of POT (proton-dependent oligopeptide transporter) family proteins. In addition to transporters, the L morphotype possesses a second copy of arginase, which catalyzes the breakdown of arginine into ornithine and urea. Arginine constitutes a major storage and transport form of organic nitrogen in plants (Winter et al., 2015) and is shown to decrease significantly on the phylloplane in the presence of certain epiphytic bacteria (Ryffel et al., 2016). Therefore, the presence of an additional copy of arginase in the L morphotype may aid in competitive nitrogen acquisition in the presence of these bacteria, allowing the fungus to take advantage of the proteinogenic amino acid with the highest nitrogen to carbon ratio (Winter et al., 2015). The L morphotype’s ability to scavenge for nitrogen sources was also reflected in the expansion of three MEROPS peptidase categories. In addition to the prominence of unique proteins involved in nitrogen metabolism, proteins from the L morphotype were significantly enriched in the LysM domain (PF01476), which binds peptidoglycan or chitin. Proteins containing LysM domains can be categorized as either proteins that contain one or more LysM domains plus a chitinase domain or as proteins with multiple LysM domains and no chitinase domain. The first type is involved in fungal growth by creating plasticity in cell walls and the second type serves to evade triggering microbe-associated molecular pattern (MAMP) elicited immune responses by binding chitin particles released from hyphae (de Jonge and Thomma 2009; Kombrink and Thomma 2013; Martinez et al. 2012). L morphotype-unique LysM proteins contain two to three LysM domains, but lack a chitinase domain indicating they belong to the latter type. These proteins could allow the L morphotype to colonize the phyllosphere while evading the host immune system. Chromosomal rearrangements have been proposed to play major roles in evolution that lead to differential adaptation (Schmidt and Hensel 2004; Kirkpatrick 2010; Kirkpatrick and Barton 2006; Stukenbrock 2013; Guttman et al., 2014; Leducq 2014; Raeside et al., 2014; Seidl and Thomma 2014); A notable structural difference between the S and L morphotype genomes is a >530 kB inversion on chromosome 8. Inversions are major drivers of adaptation and speciation in various organisms (Kirkpatrick and Barton 2006; Hoffmann and Rieseberg 2008; Kirkpatrick 2010) by impacting homologous chromosome pairing during meiosis that can result in reduced fertility and reproductive isolation (Hoffmann and Rieseberg 2008). Our phylogenetic analysis of A. flavus S and L morphotype taxa from diverse geographic regions does not resolve whether the morphotypes form monophyletic clades due to limited sample size, but does indicate the S and L isolates used in the genomic analyses belong to two distinct clades. The inversion may have resulted in limited gene flow between the morphotypes leading to distinct lineages. Inversions can also result in fortuitous changes via gene disruption or altered gene regulation at the breakpoints (Kirkpatrick and Barton 2006). In the S morphotype, there are two secondary metabolite gene clusters at the inversion breakpoints; if the compounds produced by these clusters are advantageous for microbial competition in the soil, the S inversion configuration would be advantageous for soil survival. In contrast, in the L morphotype, one of the inversion breakpoints encodes a cutinase gene, which may be favorable for nutrient acquisition in the phyllosphere. Finally, inversions can suppress recombination within the inverted region leading to maintenance of divergent allele combinations that could be advantageous in contrasting niches (Kirkpatrick and Barton 2006; Hoffmann and Rieseberg 2008; Kirkpatrick 2010). In both the S and L morphotypes, the inverted region contains genes under selection and morphotype-unique genes. In the inverted region of the S morphotype, a eukaryotic elongation factor 5A hypusine gene is under selection-and four S morphotype-unique proteins are present (a cytochrome p450, a hexapeptide repeat of succinyl transferase, a UbiA prenyltransferase, and an unknown protein). The L morphotype has one unique protein (protein with an FAD binding domain) in the inverted region. The region may also contain genes with adaptive allelic differences between the morphotypes that were not identified to be under selection. Suppressed recombination within the inversion could maintain these gene and allelic differences between the morphotypes. However, elucidation of mechanisms and extent to which these differences play a functional role in niche adaptation will require validation. In addition to the inversion creating differences in secondary metabolite clusters, the number of deletions within secondary metabolite clusters also differs between the morphotypes with more intact clusters present in the S morphotype. The L morphotype contains seven deletions within secondary metabolite clusters relative to the S morphotype, including the deletion of two PKS genes. In contrast, the S morphotype contains one deletion within secondary metabolite clusters relative to the L morphotype; however, this deletion is within the cypA gene of the aflatoxin gene cluster in which both S and L isolates have deletions with the S isolates having a larger deletion. Therefore, both morphotypes have defective cypA genes resulting in the loss of aflatoxin G production (Ehrlich et al., 2004; Probst et al., 2012; Probst et al., 2014; Adhikari et al., 2016). The differences in deletions within secondary metabolite clusters suggest the S morphotype is under higher selective pressure to maintain secondary metabolite production, consistent with the pressure to maintain aflatoxin production. Polyketide biosynthetic genes are enriched in metagenomes of soil bacteria as well (Tringe et al. 2005). The extra intact clusters in the S morphotype may produce antimicrobial compounds, signaling molecules, or chelating agents (Demain and Fang 2000) that could be advantageous for competition against the more plentiful and diverse microbes in the soil compared to the phyllosphere (Delmotte et al., 2009; Knief et al., 2012). In summary, we have used comparative genomics to test the hypothesis that the S and L morphotypes have genetic differences that could play a role in differential adaptation to the soil and phyllosphere, respectively. Our genomic comparisons indicate there are differences in gene regulation, antimicrobial activity, resistance to natural compounds and toxic chemicals, carbon and nitrogen metabolism, iron acquisition, and secondary metabolite production between the morphotypes. We have proposed how these differences could be advantageous for niche adaptation and have provided a foundation for experiments to determine the relevance of the genomic differences in niche adaptation. Functional validation of these genes is necessary as well as examination of additional S and L isolates to extend these results. Furthermore, many of the morphotype-unique proteins did not have predicted functions or domains, therefore, functional analysis of these via knockout or knock-in experiments would help in defining their potential roles in niche adaptation of the two morphotypes.