Discussion In the progress of drug design and high-throughput screening, some molecules, which belongs to Pan-Assay Interference Compounds (PAINS), disguised to bind with the target by other mechanisms and transmitted to other interferential signals for us, thus wasting a lot of resources to study on the PAINS (Baell and Holloway, 2010; Baell and Nissink, 2017). A modified compound, due to the addition or subtraction of a group, a large change in the skeletal structure may cause it to be a candidate for PAINS. Although camptothecin has been shown to be a specific active substance for topoisomerase 1 in human and some insect cells, but its derivative still have the possibility of being defined as PAINS for effects on the insect. In our work, we demonstrated that these derivatives significantly inhibited the activity of the sf Top1 protein as much as camptothecin in vitro, indicating the specific activity of the synthesized compounds on the insect. In fact, from the results of molecular dynamics simulations, we revealed the mechanism by which CPT derivatives act primarily by maintaining the stability of the complex through its six-membered ring, whereas the side chain groups can interact with protein/nucleic acids and further appropriately enhanced the stability. These evidences indicated that the mechanism of the modified camptothecin derivatives has not be changed in spite of the significantly structural changes, and ruled out the possibility of compounds becoming as PAINS for the insect. To elucidate the specific mechanism of camptothecin derivatives, we performed molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations. In the binding model of camptothecin with HsTop 1, the rigid backbone structure of camptothecin forms a strong hydrophobic interaction with the base. In addition, the hydrogen bond interaction between Top1 and camptothecin provides an essential contribution to stabilizing the top-DNA complex, which is crucial for maintaining the activity (Staker et al., 2002). Among the camptothecin derivatives we designed, some compounds, such as 4j and 4m could form strong hydrogen bonds with the insect Top1. Interestingly, the amino acid residues Asn352 and Lys436 in HsTop1, which are equivalent to Asn518 and Lys602 residues in sf Top1, may also form H-bond interactions with camptothecin derivatives to stabilize the ternary complex (Song et al., 2016). In different organisms, these two amino acid residues behave very conservatively, and they are located in the active pocket of the protein. In our study, the docking studies revealed the direct interactions between the residues Asn518 and Lys602 in the insect protein with some camptothecin derivatives we designed, and also illustrated these two residues may play critical roles in the binding of the ligand. However, in the results of the molecular dynamics simulation, the side chain of the derivative has a large volatility in the binding lumen, which is different from the docking results. The protein is inflexible during molecular docking study, and the initial structure of the protein has a large impact on the final binding model. CDOCKER molecular docking program based on the CHARMm force field can quickly predict the possible binding model of protein-ligand, but the inflexibility of protein and nucleic acid may compromise the accuracy of the results. In addition, the original CHARMm force field is not optimal for DNA during molecular docking simulation although it is particularly useful when mimicking proteins (Hart et al., 2012). In contrast, molecular dynamics simulation is better to predict the binding modes without the deficiency presenting in the docking simulations, and to verify whether proposed ligand remain in interactions with the listed residues. In fact, the binding model obtained by molecular dynamics simulation is similar to the molecular docking result, in which the compound interacts with the listed residues (Arg530, Asp698, and Lys697) and the bases via hydrogen bonding and combines with the nucleic acid by π-π stacking interactions. Overall, molecular docking simulation is still a good method to quickly predict the mainly protein-ligand binding, albeit with some deficiencies. However, molecular dynamics simulations can better explain the binding mechanism of protein-ligands in which amino acid residues in the binding lumen and ligand groups with greater flexibility. The revealed interaction mechanism by these simulations might be useful for further structural modifications and could provide valuable direction for exploring new potent compounds. Although most of the designed compounds exhibited more pronounced activity (about 10-fold) in vitro than camptothecin, the activity in vivo did not wholly follow the law in vitro, and most of the compounds showed only equivalence to camptothecin. In general, camptothecin is able to enter the cells easily and interact with Top1, and then cause apoptosis and hinder cell growth (Zhong et al., 2016). Different from the traditional neurotoxic insecticides, CPTs generally exhibit a delayed insecticidal activity (Liu et al., 2010). In addition to inducing apoptosis in insect cells, camptothecin can also induce the midgut epithelial cells apoptosis in S. litura larva (Gong et al., 2014). However, insects have a complete detoxification system, including many detoxification enzymes, therefore, they may decompose the exogenous compounds and reduce their toxicity, which might lead to the different toxicity results obtained in vitro and in vivo, but the detailed mechanism that the relationship between activity in vitro and effectiveness in vivo remains unclear and needs to be explored further. Nevertheless, in our study, some compounds, such as 4c, 4d, 4f, and 4j, still show more significant activities than camptothecin both in vitro and in vivo, and are still hopeful to continue further research as the potential pesticides. In view of this, considering the safety of using these compounds on agricultural products that would be consumed by humans, the toxicological assessments of camptothecin derivatives for environment and organisms might be performed in the future. In the early report, 0.2% camptothecin emulsifiable concentrate (EC) showed strong toxicity for control of agricultural pests and no acute oral toxicity to the mouse (LD50 > 5000 mg/kg) nor acute dermal toxicity (LD50 > 2000 mg/kg) (Ma et al., 2010), which means that the camptothecin pesticide might have a safe dosage to mammals. A high dosage of oral or injectable camptothecin drugs easily caused side effects to humans in treatment of solid tumors. In general, the final residual pesticides degraded by microorganisms in the agricultural field are often safety to mammals. However, the oral acute and sub-acute toxicity of camptothecin derivatives remains to be further evaluated, and it is also necessary to explore the highest safety dosage of the drugs for humans (Manikandan and Kannan, 2015). In addition, the residue of camptothecin derivatives need to be tested by the field experiment in order to monitor the degradation dynamics of this kind of pesticide. After a period of safety interval, the residue of camptothecin pesticide could reach to a lower level which is safe for human beings. Moreover, considering the toxicity of this kind of pesticide for non-target organisms, especially whether they could cause lethal effect or infertility on mammals when applying in the field, more assessments should be taken into account. At the same time, these potential side effects could be alleviated by continually optimizing the structure. Overall, such compounds have the special mechanism on the insect and might have a good prospect for further development.