DISCUSSION The Sxph structure defines a paradigm for molecular recognition of STX, one of nature’s most lethal poisons (1, 3, 6) at atomic resolution. The Sxph core is built from the transferrin fold (Fig. 1B), a family of soluble proteins best known for Fe3+ transport (30, 31), that has been modified to act as a “dual-function” protein that can make high-affinity interactions with STX and cysteine proteases. Contrary to expectations (20), the STX-binding site is not a remodeled version of the Fe3+-binding site but resides at a unique locale on the C1 domain. This high-affinity binding site undergoes minimal conformational changes upon binding the rigid STX scaffold. Remarkably, the general blueprint for STX recognition by Sxph using side chain carboxylates, a cation-π interaction, and a largely rigid binding site is shared with NaVs (1, 13, 29, 44–47). This commonality between a 91-kDa soluble protein and a ~200-kDa membrane protein ion channel unmasks an extraordinary convergence of STX molecular recognition strategies. How proteins acquire new ligand-binding sites is an unresolved question for which surface pockets are thought to be a key factor (51, 52). Transferrins do not bind STX (35). Structural comparisons of Sxph and transferrins identify a transferrin proto-pocket at cognate position of the Sxph STX-binding site. This region is not known to bind small molecules in any transferrin family member. Nevertheless, the structural data suggest that a limited set of changes are required to reshape this naïve site into a high-affinity small-molecule binding site and provide an example of how a protein scaffold can acquire a new function. Organisms are thought to cope with toxin exposure through diverse strategies that include target protein resistance mutations, toxin sequestration, and toxin removal (10, 11). Frogs are resistant to STX (14, 15), and Sxph may contribute to this property (16, 19). Although how toxin target mutations confer toxin resistance has been widely studied (12, 13, 53), understanding of alternative resistance mechanisms remains primitive. Our findings provide the first structural characterization of a toxin “molecular sponge,” identify an Sxph candidate in a distantly related frog family (Raindae versus Dicroglossidae), and provide a starting point for molecular dissection of toxin sequestration mechanisms. The observation that other organisms have soluble STX-binding proteins unrelated to Sxph (24–28) indicates that toxin sequestration is a general strategy (10, 16, 19) and that de novo STX-binding site creation has happened multiple times. Defining how proteins recognize STX has implications for understanding its lethal effects, the mechanisms by which organisms evade intoxication, and the design of sensors that could monitor PSP toxins in the environment and food. The Sxph:STX complex structure defined here offers a new path to design protein-based assays for STX and related toxins (7–9, 54), provides a blueprint for STX target identification, and should aid development of STX intoxication countermeasures.