DISCUSSION The growing number of bacterial pathogens uniquely adapted to survive in the presence of one or more antibiotics is an extremely serious threat to global health. The term “antibiotic resistome,” a large repertoire of genes that has been originally developed by bacteria and is currently remodeled by the selective pressure imposed by drug use/abuse, has been coined to describe the genetic determinants involved in antibiotic resistance (23, 24). Resistance to antibiotics is tightly linked to their production, since microorganisms producing these molecules must protect themselves against their action. In many cases, mechanisms of self-resistance have been shown to be mechanistically similar to the ones identified in clinical pathogens (25). Resistance genes are often carried by the same gene cluster of the antibiotic biosynthetic enzymes, and their expression is temporally coupled. Indeed, antibiotic producer cells need to express resistance determinants prior to, or concomitantly with, synthesis of the antibiotic molecule (26, 27). In recent years, the analysis of several genomes suggested that microorganisms produce only a fraction of the secondary metabolites that they encode, and new approaches have been used to identify biosynthetic gene clusters whose expression can be induced. The colocalization of resistance genes and biosynthetic genes in the genomes of underexploited groups of secondary metabolite producers, for example, has been used in pursuit of new biosynthetic pathways. This genome mining approach, guided by the search for self-resistant determinants, has been successful for topoisomerase inhibitors whose biosynthetic gene cluster has been identified by looking for putative pentapeptide repeat proteins, which are known to confer self-resistance to these molecules (28). More than half of the antibiotics currently used inhibit protein synthesis by binding to the functional centers of the ribosome. Recently, important insights into the mechanism of these antibiotics have been obtained by X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy (Cryo-EM) analysis, opening the possibility of developing new molecules by structure-based drug design (29–36). In this work, we characterized the mechanism of self-resistance of the dityromycin producer Streptomyces sp. strain AM-2504. Using E. coli and Streptomyces-based in vitro translation assays in combination with an ultracentrifugation pulldown assay, we demonstrated that the resistance determinants are localized in the Streptomyces 30S ribosomal subunit. Since the target of dityromycin is the ribosomal protein S12, we sequenced the gene coding for Streptomyces S12 and compared it with its E. coli homolog. Three amino acids in the Streptomyces protein (out of the five involved in the interaction with the antibiotic) differed from the E. coli protein sequence. Therefore, we suggest that the molecular basis underlying the self-resistance mechanism could be the reduced affinity of the antibiotic toward its target due to the amino acid substitutions on the ribosomal protein S12. To confirm this hypothesis, we introduced the observed amino acid substitutions into a plasmid-borne copy of E. coli
rpsL gene harboring another mutation conferring resistance to the antibiotic streptomycin. The observed streptomycin resistance phenotype provides explicit, albeit indirect, evidence that the plasmid gene encoding ribosomal protein S12 is effectively incorporated into the 30S subunits. Even though the setup of the assay did not allow strict quantification of the number of copies of mutant protein incorporated, it showed unequivocally that this incorporation took place and that plasmid-encoded S12 bearing two specific mutations in the dityromycin binding site conferred resistance to the antibiotic. The results shown in Fig. 4B clearly indicate the effects of amino acid replacements at the three key sites of ribosomal protein S12 involved in the binding of the antibiotic. In particular, at position 32, the substitution of the nonpolar aliphatic valine with the polar amino acid threonine interferes with the hydrophobic interaction established with the dityrosine group of dityromycin according to the crystal structure of the dityromycin-30S complex. It has been pointed out by crystallographic analysis that the arginine at position 55 packs against the N,N-dimethyl valine of the antibiotic (9). Our results strongly indicate that the replacement of a positively charged side chain, as in the case of lysine, is not sufficient to maintain the correct structure of the binding site, which presumably requires the chemical properties of the guanidinium group of arginine. This finding is consistent with the high specificity demonstrated by the arginine side chain in the interaction of proteins with their substrates (37, 38). On the other hand, we demonstrate that the substitution of Val78 with isoleucine does not interfere with the interaction of dityromycin with S12. To identify the degree of conservation of the amino acid residues responsible for dityromycin resistance, we aligned the S12 sequences to 72 Streptomyces spp. randomly selected from the NCBI database. The alignment shows that, of the three residues considered, only Ile78 (Val in E. coli) is conserved in all Streptomyces sequences analyzed. The other two key residues are quite rare, with Thr32 (Val in E. coli) reported only in 7 out of 72 genomes (Streptomyces antioxidans, S. autoliticus, S. gilvosporeus, S. iranensis, S. malaysiensis, S. natalensis, and S. violaceusniger) and Lys55 (Arg in E. coli) in only two strains, S. gilvosporeus and S. natalensis. Therefore, the results of this comparative analysis show that only 2 of 72 Streptomyces strains share the same S12 residues conferring resistance to dityromycin as Streptomyces sp. strain AM-2504 (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). When the comparative analysis was extended to 30 bacterial strains randomly covering all relevant branches of the phylogenetic tree, it was found that all selected bacteria display a valine at position 32, embedded in a stretch of four amino acids (RGVC), which is highly conserved and it is part of the “core” of a pseudo beta-barrel of S12 (Fig. S2A and S2B). The other two residues are less conserved, since Lys55 and Ile78 are found in 4 strains and 11 bacterial strains, respectively. Alignment of the amino acid sequence of ribosomal protein S12 from 72 Streptomyces strains. The arrows indicate the amino acids that are involved in dityromycin binding that are different from those in the E. coli counterpart. Download FIG S1, JPG file, 2.2 MB. (A) Alignment of the amino acid sequence of ribosomal protein S12 from 30 bacterial species. The arrows indicate the amino acids involved in dityromycin binding, and the red box indicates the highly conserved RGVC sequence motif. (B) Phylogenetic tree representing the relatedness of ribosomal protein S12 of the bacterial species reported in panel A. Download FIG S2, TIF file, 2.6 MB. To our knowledge, the results of this work represent the first example of a self-resistance mechanism mediated by a ribosomal protein in the producer strain. Resistance mechanisms identified by isolation of single mutations are extremely rare among ribosomal proteins. Point mutations in rpsL, the gene encoding S12, have been identified as the key factor conferring streptomycin resistance (39) and at the same time activate the expression of cryptic antibiotics, like the blue-colored actinorodhin (40, 41). This intriguing finding, which is the first reported evidence of an effect induced on gene expression by a point mutation located on a ribosomal protein, is still lacking a detailed explanation at the molecular level. A few other examples include protein L3, where a single mutation has been shown to confer resistance to tiamulin, the semisynthetic derivative of pleuromutiline, reducing its binding affinity for the ribosome and mutations in L16 conferring resistance to the oligosaccharide antimicrobial agents avilamycin (42) and evernimicin (43). In Pasteurella multocida, a bacterium responsible for zoonotic diseases, a combination of amino acid changes on ribosomal protein S5 (point mutation at Ser32 and amino acid deletion at Phe33) and a single transversion in helix 34 of 16S rRNA have been identified as the molecular determinants of spectinomycin resistance (44). In summary, we can conclude that Streptomyces sp. strain AM-2504 has developed a successful strategy to protect its own ribosomes from the effect of dityromycin, combining the effects of three amino acid substitutions, which occur as isolated point mutations in other Actinomyces strains and are compatible with the structural function of ribosomal protein S12. Although this resistance mechanism does not fall into the category of antibiotic resistance transfer and spreading, in a strict sense, the characterization of this strategy at the molecular level adds a new piece to the complex puzzle underlying the coevolution of antibiotic production and self-resistance mechanisms.