3. Discussion Metals have diverse physiological functions in living organisms, and their deficiency or abundance causes fatal diseases in humans. Therefore, metal homeostasis is strictly regulated in living organisms. Furthermore, metals play an important role in the pathogenicity of microbial pathogens, and the utilization of metals such as iron, copper, and zinc is a known virulence factor [7]. A. fumigatus is a saprophytic fungus that causes aspergillosis in humans. A. fumigatus has both a siderophore-mediated and a reductive iron uptake system for iron acquisition [39], and dysfunction of the siderophore-mediated iron uptake system results in failure to infect host cells [13]. Deletion of the gene encoding SidA, which catalyzes siderophore biosynthesis, results in loss of virulence [40]. Copper utilization ability is also a virulence factor in A. fumigatus. Our group identified the copper transporters, Ctr proteins, and the copper-dependent transcription activator AfMac1, and the deletion of Afmac1 resulted in growth defects in low-copper concentrations and partial loss of virulence [41,42]. Furthermore, ZafA is a zinc-dependent transcription activator of A. fumigatus, and the deletion of ZafA also results in growth defects and loss of virulence [23]. These reports indicate that iron, copper, and zinc play important roles in the pathogenicity of microbial pathogens although their detailed mechanisms have not yet been identified, and elucidation of the detailed function of metals in pathogenicity is required. Previously, we and other groups reported that Afmac1 regulates expression of the genes involved in several secondary metabolites, including siderophores, gli-like genes, and the metabolites of pyoverdine biosynthesis [43]. Furthermore, it has been reported recently that PpzA, which is involved in iron assimilation, regulates secondary metabolite biosynthesis, such as that of pyripyropene, TAFC, and fumagillin, under iron starvation conditions [44]. Our data in this report show that ZafA regulates the gene expression of secondary metabolite-encoding genes, especially gli cluster genes. These reports indicate that metals regulate the gene expression of secondary metabolites. Secondary metabolites are produced by most microorganisms and carry out diverse functions, such as protective functions against other living organisms, metal transport, differentiation, immunosuppression, and communication [45]. In fungi, secondary metabolites, such as siderophores, antibiotics, and mycotoxins, have been studied. Generally, the genes encoding secondary metabolites in fungi are clustered in the genome, and genes for gliotoxin biosynthesis are also clustered in the genome [30]. Some fungal secondary metabolites have been recognized as virulence factors [46], and gliotoxin is also recognized as a virulence factor of A. fumigatus [36]. Gliotoxin has been known as a virulence factor that causes invasive aspergillosis [47], although the function of gliotoxin during pathogenesis remains to be solved. Gliotoxin can produce reactive oxygen species because of its disulfide structure [30], and it serves an immunosuppressive function by inactivating the host defense system [48]. This immunosuppressive function of gliotoxin is involved in many different human diseases. As described previously, we and other groups reported that trace metals regulate secondary metabolite biosynthesis, but the reason why metals affect secondary metabolite production is not yet known. It has been reported that the expression of gli cluster genes is regulated by gliotoxin, abiotic factors, and the LaeA transcription factor. Gliotoxin biosynthesis is regulated by gliotoxin itself because none of the synthesized gliotoxins are secreted. The remaining cellular gliotoxin regulates the gene expression of GliZ, which is a transcription activator of gli cluster genes [49]. Abiotic factors, such as pH, temperature, and aeration, of culture conditions affect the expression of gli cluster genes [50,51,52]. LaeA, which is a transcription factor, regulates many secondary metabolites, and gliotoxin is one of them [29]. However, the detailed regulatory mechanism of gliotoxin gene expression has not yet been identified because these factors indirectly regulate the expression of gli cluster genes. Our question is how trace metals regulate gliotoxin biosynthesis. As described previously, gliotoxin has immunosuppressive function, and this function may help A. fumigatus infect host cells [32]. Therefore, gliotoxin activity during phagocytosis plays an important role in overcoming the host defense system. When pathogens infect hosts, macrophages attack microbial pathogens by phagocytosis, and diverse host defense systems are engaged during phagocytosis [53]. Metal limitation in macrophage cells is one of the host defense systems [54]. Host cells pump metals outside of macrophages so that pathogens cannot use the metals. Metal limitation inhibits metal utilization by pathogens and inhibits the growth of pathogens [54,55], ultimately resulting in a loss of virulence. In fact, effluxes of iron, copper, and zinc are observed in many phagocytic cells, and the expression of genes encoding metal transporters is upregulated during phagocytosis [55]. On the other hand, microbial pathogens compete with the host defense system to obtain metals from the environment. A. fumigatus upregulates the genes involved in the metal uptake system, and our results showed the upregulation of the genes encoding zinc transporters. In addition, upregulation of gli cluster genes during the phagocytosis pathway was observed. These data explain why zinc is involved in gliotoxin biosynthesis. Furthermore, it has been reported that zinc is necessary for gliotoxin biosynthesis and that zinc is used as a cofactor of GliJ, which encodes a dipeptidase, during gliotoxin biosynthesis [56]. From our results, we hypothesize a relationship between metal and gliotoxin production during fungal infection. We identified the direct relationship between zinc and gliotoxin biosynthesis shown in Figure 4, in which ZafA binds to the GliZ upstream region directly and regulates gliotoxin biosynthesis. This result provides data regarding the relationship between metals and secondary metabolites. We analyzed the gene expression pattern during phagocytosis, and the genes involved in zinc metabolism and gliotoxin biosynthesis were upregulated. This phenomenon results from metal restriction by the host and one of the pathogen defense systems. The expression profiles of the genes involved in zinc metabolism and gliotoxin biosynthesis are summarized in Figure 6C, and we further identified a relationship between ZafA and GliZ. When pathogens infect the host, zinc limitation occurs inside the host cells, and pathogens upregulate the genes involved in zinc metabolism. ZafA is upregulated and then upregulates the genes for gliotoxin biosynthesis. Finally, gliotoxin plays an important role in the pathogenesis pathway. The relationship between zinc and gliotoxin is linked by the zinc-responsive transcription factor ZafA. Our data showed the function of metals in regulating secondary metabolite biosynthesis and suggests a possibility for effectively carrying out pathogen control by controlling metal metabolism.