Discussion Our results show that biosynthesis begins with construction of benzoyl CoA 16 by step-wise elimination of ammonia from phenylalanine 18 (str11), oxygenation (str8) and retro-Claisen reaction to form benzoic acid 10, which is activated to its CoA thiolester 16 by a dedicated CoA ligase (str10, Fig. 5). Benzoyl CoA 16 then forms the starter unit for polyketide biosynthesis. Recent work by our group, and the group of Tang has shown that benzoyl CoA also forms the starter unit for the biosynthesis of the squalestatin hexaketide in Ascomycetes30,31. Although the two fungal pathways for the formation of benzoyl CoA share a common PAL enzyme, the squalestatin pathway involves formation of cinnamoyl CoA early in the pathway, while the strobilurin pathway is not consistent with the formation of cinnamoyl CoA as an intermediate, but appears to involve direct oxidative conversion of cinnamic acid 17 to benzoic acid 10. Use of benzoate (and other non-acetate) starter units by fungal PKS is rare. Starter unit selection is presumably controlled by the AT domain of the PKS, however in the absence of structural data it is not yet possible to determine the basis of this selectivity. The strobilurin PKS appears to contain an inactive enoyl-reductase domain (ER˚) similar to the lovastatin nonaketide synthase32 and the TENS33, but no gene encoding a trans-acting enoyl-reductase is present (e.g. lovC or tenC) and this is consistent with its synthesis of a triene. On the other hand, the strobilurin PKS is highly unusual among fungal hr-PKS in containing catalytic domains located after the ACP domain12. The presence of non-canonical catalytic domains such as C-MeT and reductive release domains is common for non-reducing PKS (e.g. methylorcinaldehyde synthase)34, but is more unusual for fungal hr-PKS, although non-ribosomal peptide35 and carnitine acyl-transferase36 mechanisms are known. The observed hydrolase domain of the strobilurin PKS may be responsible for release of prestrobilurin A 11, while the unique C-terminal methyltransferase probably attaches the C-4 methyl group as sequence analysis suggests the more normally positioned C-MeT is inactive. Further work will be required to verify this hypothesis. The strobilurins contain a highly unusual E,Z,E triene and the origin of this motif has been hitherto unexplained. Polyketides are already known, which have Z-olefins, for example, borrelidin, FR901464 and fostriecin. In the case of the modular borrelidin PKS, a DH domain creates a typical E-olefin, which is later isomerised37, while in the case of FR901464 a specialised TE domain rather than a DH domain, creates the Z-olefin38. In the case of the modular fostriecin PKS the DH from module 2 has been shown to create a Z-olefin directly39. Xie and Cane recently showed that in the cases of bongkrekic acid and oxazolomycin, produced by bacterial trans-AT PKS, a KR sets up a β-alcohol anti to an α-proton and the subsequent syn dehydration gives the Z-olefin directly40. The only KR/DH pair from a fungal hr-PKS investigated in vitro is from the SQTKS and this has a KR, which reduces to give the opposite alcohol diastereomer and the subsequent syn DH yields the E-olefin41. The strobilurin PKS is unique in being an iterative type I system that creates the Z-olefin. Our results suggest that the strobilurin PKS installs this geometry without the requirement for any other proteins, so the KR/DH domains may be able to control different stereoselectivity during their first (E), second (Z) and third (E) iterations, perhaps in response to methylation. Alternatively, the unknown domain of the strobilurin PKS may have a role in formation of the unusual E,Z,E triene, but further detailed in vitro work will be required to determine its origin. The released polyketide 11 requires oxidation and rearrangement to form the key acrylate moiety (Fig. 7a). Similar rearrangements have been suggested in the cases of aspyrone 2342 and bartanol 2443 (Fig. 7b), and are also involved in ring-contracting mechanisms in the case of xenovulene A44,45. Tang and co-workers very recently reported a family of CrtC-type (carotenoid 1,2-hydratase) enzymes, which can catalyse rearrangements of epoxides. In the case of the CrtC-enzyme PenF this rearrangement is a Meinwald rearrangement on the pathway to penigequinolone. In our hands expression of the FAD-dependent monooxygenase encoded by str9 in the presence of prestrobilurin A 11 effectively accomplishes the oxidative rearrangement in vivo involving the highly unusual migration of a carboxylate. This reaction is also observed in vitro. We propose that epoxidation of the 2,3 olefin of 11, followed by Meinwald rearrangement of 25 would furnish the aldehyde intermediate 26. This intermediate, however, seems to be highly reactive and in the absence of other enzymes it appears to undergo rapid retro-Claisen reaction to give the observed carboxylic acid 21 (Fig. 7a). In Strobilurus species rapid enolisation of 26 would give the β-methoxyacrylate skeleton 27 and methylation (catalysed by Str2 and Str3) would give strobilurin A 1 directly. Further support for the intermediacy of 26 comes from the reductive pathway to 22 and bolineol 8. The reduction occurs both in the presence of Stl2 (expt 11, expt 18) and, in A. oryzae, absence of Stl2 (expt 17) likely due, at least in part, to a shunt pathway in A. oryzae, which is known to reduce aldehydes easily46. The FDO Str4 is a member of the GMCO superfamily, which are enzymes responsible for the oxidation of primary alcohols to aldehydes. In the presence of Str4 and absence of the reductase Stl2, the pathway produces strobilurin A 1 and the shunt 21 (expt 12). In the absence of Str4, and the presence of Stl2, the pathway produces bolineol 8 instead (expt 18). This suggests that in S. tenacellus the pathway may be controlled to produce 1 or 8 selectively, possibly by control of the individual promoters. In our A. oryzae expression more crude control of the promoters (e.g. expt 11) produces both compounds. A possible pathway from 8 to 1 via alcohol oxidation and methylation is also possible, but we could find no LCMS evidence in support of the required mono-methyl intermediate. The retro-Claisen removal of the β-aldehyde of 26 links this step to the proposed oxidative ring contractions involved during xenovulene A biosynthesis that are also catalysed by FAD-dependent enzymes45. However, bioinformatic analysis shows no significant homology between Str9 and AsR4 and AsR6 that are responsible for these reactions in Sarocladium schorii45. There is also no significant homology between Str9, or any other protein encoded by the str BGC, and PenF, suggesting that Str9 accomplishes both the oxidation of 11 and the rearrangement to form 26. The proposed rearrangement mechanism involves the unusual migration of a carboxylate as proven by the isotopic labelling studies10. Similar processes are known, for example, during the mechanism of methylmalonate mutase and during the biosynthesis of the tropane alkaloid hyoscyamine from littorine 28 (Fig. 8). In the classic case of methylmalonate mutase the reaction is known to be adenosylcobalomin-dependent, and to proceed via single-electron species47. In the case of hyoscyamine biosynthesis a cytochrome P450 enzyme is known to catalyse the key rearrangement of littorine 28 to give 2S-hyoscyamine aldehyde 29. Calculations reported by Sandala et al.48 suggest that the lowest-energy pathway for this conversion involves rearrangement of a cationic species such as 30 obtained by facile oxidation of an intermediate radical 31, with acceleration promoted by partial deprotonation of the alcohol and partial protonation of the carboxyl. However, in vitro studies of the enzyme by O’Hagan and co-workers49 supported a rearrangement mechanism with more radical character. In the strobilurin rearrangement formation of radical intermediates seems unlikely and a cationic mechanism via e.g. 32 is consistent with other Meinwald processes50 and the calculations for the littorine 28 rearrangement to which it shows remarkable structural similarities (Fig. 8). However, further in vitro experiments will be required to definitively determine the mechanism.Fig. 8Proposed mechanism of the strobilurin rearrangement and (boxed) comparison with a proposed cationic rearrangement mechanism of 2R-littorine. R = 3-tropanyl Fig. 8Proposed mechanism of the strobilurin rearrangement and (boxed) comparison with a proposed cationic rearrangement mechanism of 2R-littorine. R = 3-tropanyl Proposed mechanism of the strobilurin rearrangement and (boxed) comparison with a proposed cationic rearrangement mechanism of 2R-littorine. R = 3-tropanyl Both S. lutea and S. tenacellus produce a range of modified strobilurins, including the chlorinated strobilurin B 6. However, the cluster encodes no obvious halogenase gene that could be involved in its production. Similarly, no obvious dimethylallyl-transferase appears to be encoded within the currently determined BGC. This leaves the biosynthesis of compounds such as strobilurin G 7 as cryptic for the time being. It is possible that unknown proteins encoded in, or near, the BGC (e.g. str1 and stl1) may form new classes of halogenases or dimethylallytransferases, or that the responsible genes are located elsewhere on the genome. Similarly, proteins encoded by str5/str6 (hydrolases) appear to have no chemical role in the biosynthesis of 1. No obvious self-resistance gene was found within the cluster and this correlates with previous studies suggesting that the mitochondrial cytochrome bc1 complex of S. tenacellus is not inhibited by β-methoxyacrylates14 (see Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Figures 45–47 for analysis of the resistance mechanism of S. lutea and S. tenacellus). Overall, investigation of the strobilurin biosynthetic pathway in Strobilurus species has revealed how nature has generated this valuable class of fungicides, making use of: a previously unobserved biosynthetic pathway to benzoyl CoA 16; a class of highly reducing iterative fungal PKS, which appears to include a very unusual partial hydrolase and C-MeT domains located downstream of the usually terminal ACP, and which is capable of forming a highly unusual E,Z,E triene; and a previously unobserved FAD-dependent oxygenase, which is responsible for the key oxidative rearrangement of a polyketide skeleton to form the crucial β-methoxyacrylate toxophore of the strobilurin fungicides. The use of heterologous expression once again illustrates the power of this method for the investigation and engineering of fungal BGCs. In our hands the unoptimised heterologous expression host produced over 100 mg L−1 of strobilurin-related metabolites compared to 30 mg L−1 in optimised WT fermentations.