3. Discussion Nowadays, great efforts have illuminated the mechanisms underpinning the biosynthesis of a diverse array of natural products from various bacteria. This research makes it possible to link the known natural products to their biosynthetic gene clusters. Moreover, the development of genome sequencing technology and many computational tools for natural product discovery have promised a remarkable increase in mining bacterial cryptic BGCs [40]. The available information on the genomic sequences of Actinosynnema revealed their circular chromosome structures with a relatively high GC content (>73%) among Actinobacteria. The initial comparative genome analysis of four sequenced Actinosynnema strains exhibited extremely high homology with the almost identical multilocus sequences by phylogenetic marker analysis. However, detailed analysis by Antismash revealed that chromosome harbored diversified secondary metabolite BGCs. Based on the comparative information of the BGCs of Actinosynnema species, we found the gene cluster responsible for dnacin B1 biosynthesis in strain DSM 44131T, which was not reported before. The diversity of THIQ structures resulted mainly from different kinds of amino acid precursors for the recognition of NRPS proteins and diverse post-modifications. Previous incorporation experiments with labeled precursor and biosynthetic investigations demonstrated that the non-proteinogenic aromatic amino acid was responsible for the quinone moiety of THIQ and originated from tyrosine in ET-743, SFMs, SAC-B, NDM and phenylalanine in QNC. The bioinformatics analysis showed that DinV, DinE and DinF individually encoded 4-amino-4-deoxychorismate synthase, 4-amino-4-deoxychorismate mutase and 4-amino-4-deoxyprephenate dehydrogenase in dnacin B1 BGC, and displayed 48%, 34% and 40% similarities with PapA, PapB and PapC in S. venezuelae, which were responsible for the biosynthesis of PAPA in chloramphenicol. Thus, it was deduced that, similarly to the chloramphenicol biosynthesis, the quinone moiety of dnacin B1 arose from PAPA rather than tyrosine. In addition, the biosynthetic pathway reconstitution of PAPA in E. coli suggested that TyrB was responsible for the transformation of amino group into PAPP, although the detailed biochemical analysis of TyrB in PAPA assembly was unclear. Our systematic screening of the aminotransferases involved in PAPA biosynthesis from the genome of strain DSM 44131T resulted in the discovery of APAT4 and APAT9, displaying intriguing amino transformation ability, which might be a preferred aminotransferase candidate for further heterologous expression of PAPA in other hosts. All the screened APAT genes, including apat4 and apat9, were found in the other three Actinosynnema strains regardless of the production of dnacin B1 or PAPA (Table S6). This appearance revealed that the biosynthesis of PAPA does share the same aminotransferases as other aromatic amino acids in basic metabolism. The biosynthetic pathway of PAPA can be verified by the co-occurrence of DinV, DinE and DinF in a heterologous host E. coli BL21 (DE3), which makes it possible to explore more PAPA pathways containing BGCs by MultiGeneBlast. Our genome mining results displayed that homologs of PAPA biosynthetic gene cassettes were discovered in several Streptomyces species (Figure S9), as well as in Saccharopolyspora species (Figure S9). Not all the aminotransferase genes involved in PAPA biosynthesis were anchored in these BGCs. Remarkably, detailed analysis of these explored BGCs revealed that the encoding metabolites were distributed into non-ribosomal peptides and other hybrid types. This finding reveals that PAPA biosynthesis genes would be the useful baits for discovering novel antibiotics using bioinformatics analysis.