3. Discussion The present results suggest that what makes P. aeruginosa strains resistant to multiple phages is the existence of a large accessory genome encoding genes for several resistance mechanisms and a variety of prophages. The PcyII-40 mu-like phage present at PCYII-40_MGE3 might be capable of superinfection exclusion but we don’t know whether such a mechanism is provided by any other prophage. These strains also possess genes that allow them to attack and destroy other P. aeruginosa strains. The cluster of genes in PCYII-29_MGE4 allows the synthesis of pyoluteorin, an antifungal compound [75]. P. aeruginosa strains bearing multiple MGEs were previously described, but this characteristic was not linked to the capacity to resist phages [9,87]. IS were numerous in MPhR strains, some being responsible for inactivating genes, leading to a loss of function and, in particular, in LPS and T4P biosynthesis. In some P. aeruginosa strains, movements of IS were shown to be particularly frequent, thus enhancing the capacity of the cells to mutate their genes in a reversible fashion [88]. This might be very important for survival in the environment, where the integrity of the membrane and presence of appendages are essential. Among the genomic islands, those conferring innate immunity were abundant, with two or three different R-M systems in each strain, offering a variety of targets [89,90]. It is interesting to observe that R-M systems and multiple prophages can be found in the same cell, reflecting phage-host population dynamics and confirming, as previously proposed, that R-M can promote prophage acquisition at the population level [91]. Indeed, the three MPhR strains were polylysogenic, in particular PcyII-29 and PcyII-40 which possessed a large variety of prophages, some showing no similarity with known viruses at the genome level. Sequencing of the MitC-activated prophages showed that different levels of expressions between phages were achieved, some being produced in very large amounts. Among those that could be cultivated, F10-like phages have the largest host range, and they presented some interesting characteristics. A comparison of their genomes showed blocks of highly conserved sequences alternating with diverged regions holding genes that participate in virulence. At least four phages were activated in PcyII-40, of which PCYII-40_MGE8 was shown to perform lateral transduction by packaging the chromosomal DNA present at the site of the prophage insertion. This behavior was first described with phage Pf725A and later observed with Staphylococcus aureus phages [74,92]. The proportion of packaged bacterial DNA to phage DNA in Pf725A was smaller than with PCYII-40_MGE8 [74]. This category of phages is particularly interesting, as they are responsible for transducing bacterial DNA with a high frequency [93]. The host range of phage PCYII-40_MGE8 is very restricted, and we could not find a host to amplify it, therefore limiting further investigations. The presence of CRISPR-Cas systems was negatively correlated with the presence of MGE, as only the phage-susceptible strain PcyII-10 possessed an intact CRISPR-Cas system. This is in agreement with previous observations suggesting that this defense system is not a major mechanism of resistance to lytic phages [34], although the CRISPR arrays occasionally carry spacers targeting lytic phages [35]. In PcyII-10, the CRISPR-Cas system may have played a role in limiting the accumulation of IS, although no spacers in the three CRISPR arrays matched these or other PcyII-10 genomic sequences. It was proposed that the presence of self-targeting spacers resulted in a loss of MGE-bearing protospacers [94]. Immunity provided by prophages may not be the most important mechanism for multiphage resistance, as polylysogeny is frequent in P. aeruginosa, and most temperate phages show a narrow host range and rarely provide heteroimmunity [95,96]. However, some prophages encode a variety of functions that participate in the defense against viral attacks, as shown in P. aeruginosa for mu-like bacteriophages [23] and for Mycobacterium smegmatis [97]. By comparison with observations made with mu-like phage D3112, PfII40a, a related phage [80], may confer heteroimmunity through different mechanisms, such as the specific interaction between the c repressor and the cognate operator [98]. Pf1-like bacteriophages were found in all the strains. In strain LES (Liverpool Epidemic Strain), these phages are highly active and may have a role in the competitiveness of LES [18,99,100,101]. They contribute to bacterial short-term evolution and virulence [27]. The three strains lack LPS O-antigen B bands and functional type IV pili. T4P are involved in multiple cellular functions [102] and constitute an important virulence factor of P. aeruginosa [103]. As a consequence of mutations in T4P biosynthesis genes, the motility of the MPhR strains was strongly affected, but two of the investigated strains, PcyII-29 and PcyII-40, still formed biofilms with a high efficiency, a factor that may help them escape antibiotics. It is important to stress that the three strains selected on the basis of their resistance to multiple phages turned out to be those that possess the highest number of prophages as compared to PAO1 and PcyII-10. They spontaneously release phages when grown to the plateau or on richly infected plates. Their capacity to release R-type pyocins and phages may give them a competitive growth advantage over negative P. aeruginosa strains [69,104] and may contribute to the regulation of P. aeruginosa density in vivo, as suggested [105].