Discussion Although algal–fungal co-cultures have been successfully used for biotechnological processes [38], as well as establishing algal–fungal [39] and tripartite algal–fungal–bacterial interaction systems [40], the responses of microbial consortia to harmful invaders remained largely understudied. An important step toward the goal of understanding important ecological interactions and their evolutionary selection is the study of increasingly complex biosystems in the laboratory. Among the simplest naturally occurring examples of such interactions are lichens that represent an early evolutionary emergence of organismal co-existence [3, 41]. Lichens typically consist of a photobiont, such as a green alga or a cyanobacterium and a fungal partner, the mycobiont [42]. Recent studies also reported the association of bacterial consortia with lichens [9, 10]. How such algal–fungal associations may cooperate to facilitate responses to, for instance, invasion by toxin-producing microbes is largely unknown. Here, we discovered a lichen-like association of a fungus and a green alga that helps to protect the alga against toxic bacterial compounds (Fig. 6).Fig. 6Graphical model of the tripartite interaction of S. iranensis, A. nidulans, and C. reinhardtii.S. iranensis produces algicidal azalomycin F and releases it in presence of C. reinhardtii. As a counter measure, C. reinhardtii is attracted by A. nidulans and takes shelter in its mycelium. A. nidulans provides a high surface to azalomycin F and sequesters the compound. This way less azalomycin F is accessible for C. reinhardtii and the alga is less affected by the compound. Fig. 6Graphical model of the tripartite interaction of S. iranensis, A. nidulans, and C. reinhardtii.S. iranensis produces algicidal azalomycin F and releases it in presence of C. reinhardtii. As a counter measure, C. reinhardtii is attracted by A. nidulans and takes shelter in its mycelium. A. nidulans provides a high surface to azalomycin F and sequesters the compound. This way less azalomycin F is accessible for C. reinhardtii and the alga is less affected by the compound. Graphical model of the tripartite interaction of S. iranensis, A. nidulans, and C. reinhardtii. S. iranensis produces algicidal azalomycin F and releases it in presence of C. reinhardtii. As a counter measure, C. reinhardtii is attracted by A. nidulans and takes shelter in its mycelium. A. nidulans provides a high surface to azalomycin F and sequesters the compound. This way less azalomycin F is accessible for C. reinhardtii and the alga is less affected by the compound. Bacterial azalomycin F exhibits anti-Gram-positive, antifungal, and algicidal activity We have demonstrated that S. iranensis kills the green alga C. reinhardtii when both organisms were grown in co-culture. The algicidal compound was identified as the polyketide azalomycin F that also has antifungal and antibacterial activity against Gram positives [29, 31]. The reported algicidal activity found here points to a potential role of toxins in shaping algal–fungal associations. For only a few natural products their ecological meaning has been elucidated. For example, terpenoids serve various functions ranging from chemical communication to defense against predators in plants [43]. The anaerobic bacterium Clostridium puniceum uses the polyphenolic metabolite clostrubin to be able to grow in an oxygen-containing environment and to defend its habitat against competitors [44]. Bacterial cyclic lipopeptides are known to play many biological roles, from promoting motility in the case of surfactin [45], to immobilize algal cells for predation [46]. A recent example by us showed that S. rapamycinicus induced the production of the novel compound fumigermin in A. fumigatus. The compound inhibits the germination of the inducing S. rapamycinicus [47]. Here, we identified an ecological function of a tripartite interaction between an alga and a fungus that protects the alga against a toxic bacterial natural product. Streptomycetes are known to synthesize algicidal compounds such as NIG355, a nigericin derivative that inhibits the growth of a dinoflagellate [48] and the harmful algal bloom-forming haptophyte Phaeocystis globosa [49]. The observed light-dependency of the algicidal activity of azalomycin F remains obscure. The toxicity is independent of photosynthesis as photosynthesis-defective mutants of C. reinhardtii were effectively killed by azalomycin F. In addition, the significance of this observation for an ecological setting is unclear, as C. reinhardtii will almost always be illuminated to some extent in its natural habitat. It should be noted, however, that C. reinhardtii has at least 18 photoreceptors that absorb light in the UV as well as blue and red visible spectrum [50], and the biophysical properties and biological functions of only a few of these are known. It is conceivable that by disturbing the plasma membrane azalomycin F affects the positioning or presence of photoreceptors with a potentially lethal outcome (Fig. 6). In addition, we tested mutants that are deficient in assembly of the photosynthetic complex [33, 34]. Although the mutants still produce chlorophyll they are deficient in photosynthesis. It is thus conceivable that the presence of chlorophyll is already sufficient to render the cells susceptible to azalomycin F in a light-dependent manner. Azalomycin F is specifically released in the presence of C. reinhardtii Azalomycin F is produced by S. iranensis in monoculture but the majority of the compound is associated with the bacterial cells and not in the supernatant. Only co-cultivation of S. iranensis with C. reinhardtii triggered the release of azalomycin F, which, in turn, led to the killing of the alga. It is yet unclear whether azalomycin F resides inside the cell and is exported, or, whether it is attached to the bacterial membrane and simply detached from it upon a certain signal. Typically, biosynthesis of an antibiotic is directly coupled to its export to avoid self-intoxication. For example, the exporters of the gyrase inhibitors simocyclinone [51] or of actinorhodin [52] are co-expressed with the corresponding biosynthesis genes. The export machinery of azalomycin F is as yet unknown as no putative exporter is encoded in the biosynthetic gene cluster [21]. That a mechanism of detection of the alga and subsequent active release, secretion or detachement of azalomycin F must be at work derives from our observation that C. reinhardtii is killed in conditions that prevent cellular contact. Azalomycin F activity is neutralized by the presence of fungal membranes We observed that C. reinhardtii is protected against bacterial azalomycin F by taking shelter in the mycelium of A. nidulans. Furthermore, we provide evidence that lipid binding is a means of neutralizing azalomycin F algicidal activity [26, 36]. We showed that azalomycin F has specificity for some polar lipids and that the polar membrane lipid phosphatidylinositol, which is important for signaling in eukaryotic cells [53–55], is also bound by azalomycin F. Ergosterol, an important cell membrane component of both A. nidulans and C. reinhardtii [56, 57], is not bound by azalomycin F, which further underlines its specificity to polar lipids (Supplementary Fig. 12). This differs markedly from other antifungal macrolides such as amphotericin B, which is considered to primarily bind ergosterol [58]. We thus propose that polar membrane lipids are the target of azalomycin F as well as the key to the protective mechanism by competitive binding (Fig. 6). A similar strategy has been applied to neutralize bacterial toxins as an antibiotic adjunctive therapy in severe pneumococcal pneumonia. Liposomal nanoparticles acted as traps for a broad panel of bacterial toxins that are known to be inserted in cellular membranes [59, 60]. Thus, this medical concept, which is promising to treat infectious diseases, appears to have existed in nature for a long time. It is interesting to note that S. macrospora could not protect C. reinhardtii from azalomycin F despite attracting the alga. This coincides with susceptibility of S. macrospora against azalomycin F that is not observed for S. cerevisiae and A. nidulans. It is tempting to speculate that only fungi resistant against azalomycin F have the capability to protect C. reinhardtii. The reason for the susceptibility of S. macrospora against azalomycin F awaits further clarification. Fungal hyphae can provide various benefits to partner organisms, as exemplified by the symbiosis of fungi and terrestrial plants in the Mycorrhiza. Here, the fungus gains fixed carbon products from the phytobiont, in exchange provides nitrogen, phosphate, and increased water supply to the land plant [61]. The fungal hyphae can be used as “fungal highways” by predatory bacteria to bridge unfavorable environments and find new, otherwise inaccessible prey [62]. Fungal mycelia have been also suggested to form microhabitats for bacteria. For example, Morchella crassipes fosters growth of associated Pseudomonas putida bacteria that in turn were also used as a carbon source by the fungus [63]. Another example is the bacterial community colonizing the truffle-fruiting body, which produces thiophene volatiles. These compounds might form the characteristic aroma of the truffle and are discussed to attract endozoochoric spore dispersers [64]. Similarly, we found that A. nidulans enhanced the growth of C. reinhardtii. Algal–fungal association as a novel way of coping with biotic stress Lutzoni et al. proposed that the common ancestor of the modern Eurotiales, including the genus Aspergillus, once was lichen forming but the recent fungi have lost this ability during the course of evolution [65]. However, our data indicate that there is residual capability of forming symbiosis in the filamentous fungi investigated here because, the motile single-celled green alga C. reinhardtii readily migrated into A. nidulans and S. macrospora hyphal shells in liquid and formed macroscopic structures, in which the algal cells gathered around fungal hyphae. Likewise, it was reported that auxotrophic mutants of A. nidulans unable to assimilate nitrite formed an obligate mutualism with C. reinhardtii. The algal partner was able to provide nitrogen to the fungus [19]. A. nidulans and C. reinhardtii may well have retained the capabilities of their lichen-forming ancestors to form a kind of algal–fungal mutualism. For C. reinhardtii, this is not surprising because species of the genus Chlamydomonas have been previously identified as mycetobiont algae in lichen-like symbiotic associations of wood-decaying fungi [66]. With reference to the co-evolution of fungi, algae, and terrestrial plants, Delaux et al. [67] postulated that plant genes relevant for symbiosis were already present in an algal ancestor. It is thus conceivable that a fungal ancestor of mycorrhiza and an ancient lichen-forming Aspergillus species likewise might have already possessed the genes promoting symbiosis. Indeed, it has been suggested that the fungal spread on land and the radiation of terrestrial plants are linked to their preexisting ability to establish symbioses [68]. A. nidulans and C. reinhardtii may thus have retained some genetic traits allowing for algal–fungal mutualism that provides a selective advantage over noncooperators, although both microorganisms no longer contribute to the formation of stable lichens and live solitarily. Protection against environmental toxins may contribute to the evolution of lichen-like associations C. reinhardtii cells located within the A. nidulans mycelium exhibited increased survival rates when treated with azalomycin F compared with C. reinhardtii that was prevented from entering the fungal mycelium. Presently, abiotic factors, such as water availability and radiation, are primarily considered as triggers for tight interactions [69, 70]. It stands to reason that at some point during algal–fungal co-evolution, attacks by invasive and harmful microorganisms will have occurred. Indeed, metagenomic data have indicated the presence of virulence-associated functions within the lichen microbial consortia, such as antibiotic biosynthesis genes and secretion systems. Furthermore, streptomycetes that produce antibiotic [11, 13, 14] and antifungal metabolites [12] were successfully isolated from lichens. Our data suggest that the ability to form algal–fungal associations is a viable strategy for coping with environmental toxins and biotic challenges by providing a selection advantage based on establishing symbiosis.