4. Discussion and Conclusions Through an analysis of physicochemical properties and antibiotic residues and comparing different treatment methods and organic fertilizers, it can be seen that composting can significantly reduce the antibiotic residues in organic fertilizers. The degradation of SMN during the composting of animal manure is inconsistent. This result was in good agreement with the results of the last two studies: dairy cow manure can effectively decompose the residual SMN after composting, which is speculated to be caused by the combined effects of raw material solids and temperature [51]. At the same time, the results of He’s research showed that the SA and SDZ remaining in the broiler manure were almost completely degraded after composting. This phenomenon may be caused by temperature-dependent abiotic processes [52]. Composting can effectively degrade residual antibiotics in organic fertilizers but not completely remove them. The possible reason was that the antibiotic residue decayed significantly in the manure after the treatment, resulting in decreased antibiotic residue [29]. Previous studies showed that the target antibiotics were removed, while the proliferation of ARGs could not be prevented, and there is a significant positive correlation between the residues of antibiotics at subtherapeutic levels and the accumulation of ARGs [53], and that their degradation also has a positive effect on maintaining the presence of ARGs [54]. The addition of antibiotics inhibits microbial activity in the early stages of composting but promotes the proliferation of ARGs, especially in the mesophilic phase. Integron-mediated horizontal gene transfer (HGT) plays an important role in the proliferation of most ARG types studied [55,56,57,58,59]. Therefore, as antibiotic residues still exist in organic fertilizers, their effects on ARG proliferation cannot be ignored. After composting, the C/N changes of EC, CD, SM, and CM groups indirectly reflected their microbial activity. Analyzing the differences in microbial community structure of organic fertilizer indicated that there are obvious differences in the microbial community structures of different organic fertilizers and that composting obviously changes the microbial community structure in organic manure. The manure-borne bacterial community showed that the relative abundance of Actinobacteria increased in the EC (13%), CD (50%), SM (33.7%), and CM (48.5%) groups after composting (Figure S5). To evaluate the effect of compost on ARGs, we used HT-qPCR to quantify the abundance and diversity of ARGs. Although the types and abundances of the 285 assessed ARGs differed greatly from those found in organic fertilizer, a total of 218 ARGs and 10 MGEs were detected, which was consistent with previous studies [11,60] and indicated the importance of animal manure as a reservoir for ARGs [61,62,63]. ARGs for broad-spectrum antibiotics were detected, and some of these ARGs have never been previously reported in organic fertilizer samples [64,65,66,67]. However, this broad-spectrum distribution of ARGs in organic fertilizer samples varies from that in soil samples [55,68]. Although the relative abundance varied among different organic fertilizer samples, the types of ARGs were roughly the same. This is attributable mainly to the different antibiotic contact histories of the two environments [69,70]. Furthermore, previous studies have found that thermophilic anaerobic digestion decreased ARGs better than moderate and mesophilic anaerobic digestion [71,72]. Illumina sequencing of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene in this study showed that after organic fertilizer composting, the diversity and abundance of the microbial community was improved, the dominant population changed significantly (specifically, in the CMC group, Actinobacteria (48.5%) became the dominant population, in the CDC group, Actinobacteria (50%) is the dominant population and in the SMC group, Actinobacteria (33.7%) is the dominant population, while in the ECC group, Cytophagia (28.8%) and Actinobacteria (13.3%) became the dominant populations). Combining these experimental results, it can be found that after organic fertilizer composting, the diversity and abundance of ARGs was significantly reduced (ranged from 2.3 × 104 to 2.49 × 107) and there was a significant correlation between ARG structure and bacterial community composition (p < 0.05) (Figure 9). The experimental results showed that no complete elimination of ARGs occurred with and without composting. According to the experimental conditions before and after composting, it can be speculated that the dynamic change in ARGs may be attributed to the HGT produced by bacterial cells through MGEs, the changes in the concentrations of residual antibiotics, the changes in NH4+-N and NO3−-N content, the temperature change during compost, and the succession of the related bacterial communities. Previous studies have found that reducing MGEs plays a key role in the removal of ARG from compost, which is consistent with our results [73]. In addition, the integrase gene copy number remained nearly constant after composting, which may reflect no significant change in the integron-mediated HGT activity with composting. Current research has found that these relatively abundant ARGs are often detected in organic fertilizers [65]. Clearly, the enrichment in ARGs without composting was much higher than that with composting, which may be due to the many antibiotic residues and ARGs in poultry manure, as poultry manures are regarded as reservoirs of ARGs [39,55,65]. Of course, the amount of antibiotics added to the feed used in different poultry farms is different, and the abundance of native ARGs in the intestines of poultry is different, which may lead to this phenomenon. Although the abundance of some ARGs increased after composting, the overall results showed that the abundance of most ARGs after composting was significantly reduced. Organic fertilizers from different sources have unique ARGs, but overall, aminoglycoside resistance genes and MGEs exhibited high abundance. Existing research results show that composting can effectively reduce most types of ARGs in livestock manure [65]. According to the composting conditions, the temperature increase in the thermophilic phase during the composting process and the exposure to the air during the composting process are not conducive to the survival of anaerobic bacteria, which may lead to a reduction in ARGs after organic fertilizer composting [74]. Due to the anaerobic environment in the intestines of animals and the existence of a large number of Gram-negative bacteria that can carry various ARGs, these ARGs generally do not exist in thermophiles; therefore, composting organic manure for poultry and livestock can effectively reduce [65] ARG content. According to the Pearson’s correlation coefficients in this study (p < 0.05), the correlation between ARGs (qPCR data) and bacterial community structure and composition (16S rRNA OTU data) was significant (Figure 3, Figure 4, and Figure 9). After composting, ARGs showed a significant correlation with the relative abundance of Firmicutes and Actinobacteria, and the relative abundance of Actinobacteria clearly increased (Figure S5 and Figure 9). Previous studies have found that Bacilli and Flavobacteria within Firmicutes, which prevail during the thermophilic phase of composting, were significantly related to ARGs [75]. Many previous reports have shown that [76] Actinobacteria exhibit multiresistance and self-resistance [77] and that these bacteria are regarded as the main host microbial community of ARGs. Firmicutes and Actinobacteria are some of the most prevalent predicted source phyla of ARGs and have a clear correlation with changes in the abundance and diversity of ARGs based on the main resistance mechanisms of acetyltransferases and phosphotransferases [78]. This may also cause aminoglycoside resistance genes to be enriched in organic fertilizers after composting. These results suggested that rather than HGT, the diversity and abundance of bacterial communities affected by physical and chemical properties were the main drivers of shaping and altering the abundance and diversity of ARGs. Previous studies have shown that bacterial community composition is the main determinant of soil ARG content, which is consistent with the results of this study [78]. As the VPA shows, the percentage of variation explained by MGEs is only 22.43%, which is lower than the percentage explained by the bacterial community and environmental factors. This result indicated that the HGT of ARGs before and after composting is less important than other factors in this study. However, the microbial community structure before and after the composting of different organic fertilizers is very different, and the diversity and abundance of most samples after composting are higher than those before composting. Therefore, HGT cannot be ruled out. Moreover, there is a clear positive correlation between MGEs and ARGs, which further proves that the potential of HGT to spread and concentrate ARGs cannot be ignored. Abundant and enriched ARGs can still be detected after composting, which indicates that direct application of composted organic fertilizers in the field may lead to the spread of ARGs in soils. Organic fertilizers from different sources have different abundances and diversities of ARGs due to the influence of different livestock and feeding sources. Although composting can effectively reduce the abundance of ARGs, the changes in MGEs are limited, so HGT fails to prevent ARG proliferation and its impact cannot be underestimated.