3. Discussion Previously, the biosynthesis of PUM was characterized by generation of KO mutants in the WT producer strain Streptomyces sp. DSM26212. Nine catalytic steps were proposed for the formation of PUM and all steps were matched with plausible enzymatic functions encoded within the BGC, proposing the minimal PUM BGC [9]. While the involvement of the pumH-encoded protein in PUM biosynthesis was corroborated by the KO experiments, it was also shown that deletion of pumH from the WT producer did lead to a drastically reduced production yield but not to abolition of PUM biosynthesis. Thereby, this result pointed towards a rather regulatory function of PumH. It was reasoned that PumH as adenylate kinase alters the phosphorylation pattern of the precursor uridine, which in turn could be processed into pseudouridine. However, when lacking PumH, free pseudouridine could be sourced in small amounts from tRNA turnover derived from primary metabolism, thereby enabling minute production of PUM [9]. This gives evidence that PumH has a gatekeeper function in funneling uridine-based nucleotides (UMP or UDP) as precursor molecules towards the PUM pathway. This is important for the producing organism in order to ensure that the uridine pool designated to transcription and translation is not drained for PUM production. In this way, PumH would decouple PUM biosynthesis from the primary metabolism uridine pool. However, heterologous expression of the identified genes in S. coelicolor M1146, a specialized expression host that shows reduced metabolic background (since several BGCs for specialized metabolites were deleted) [11], including and excluding pumH did not lead to clearly detectable production of PUM (i.e., only constructs including pumH resulted in traces of PUM at the detection limit). This showed that heterologous production was not only bottlenecked by absence of PumH and provoked the question whether the proposed biosynthetic route covers all steps, hence whether the proposed minimal PUM BGC is correct or whether further important functions are encoded in the BGC. Further investigation aimed towards identification of a gene, vital for heterologous manufacture of PUM. Here, pumF could be identified as the most-promising candidate: the pumF gene is located right in the middle of the BGC and shows homology to the gene mur33 (77% query coverage; 43% identity) in the BGC coding for the nucleoside muraymycin C1. Furthermore, both encoded proteins show homology to predicted serine/threonine protein kinases of Actinomycetes. Enzyme phosphorylation is one of the most common post-translational modifications, often involved in regulation of enzyme activity, i.e., activating or inactivating a given enzyme [12]. Hence, it seemed reasonable to assume that this gene is indirectly involved in the PUM biosynthesis, by regulating the activity of one or more enzymes participating in assembly of the molecule. Heterologous expression of the previously identified minimal BGC incorporating pumF led to detectable PUM formation. Thereby, involvement of PumF in the PUM biosynthesis was corroborated. It has to be emphasized that the presented results do not contradict the initially proposed biosynthetic route [9]; instead, heterologous expression is a further proof of the PUM BGC. However, the collected data here clearly show that the genes pumH and pumF are vital for heterologous PUM production and hence should be considered components of the minimal BGC necessary for PUM biosynthesis as well. Based on the obtained results, we propose that the genes pumD, E, G, I, J, K, M, and N code for enzymes directly participating in de novo formation of PUM, while pumH serves as a decoupling mechanism of PUM biosynthesis from primary metabolism, as demonstrated before by KO experiments [9]. It seems that the function of PumH is provision of phosphorylated uridine nucleosides that can serve as a substrate for the pseudouridine synthase PumJ. However, the exact biochemistry catalyzed by PumH requires in-depth investigation in future studies. The nature of the ’correct’ phosphorylation pattern remains enigmatic to a certain degree, since UTP, UDP and UMP (analogous to ATP, ADP and AMP) naturally occur in primary metabolism, which PUM biosynthesis is decoupled from by PumH. This might be considered a hint towards cryptic nucleoside phosphorylation for precursor molecules, similar to biosynthesis of the uridine nucleoside analogue natural products nikkomycin Z and polyoxin D [13]. The pumF gene encodes a regulatory protein controlling the enzymatic activity of one (or more) of the participating enzymes by post-translational phosphorylation. Due to the presence of minor traces of an ion consistent with PUM, it remains possible that the target enzyme of PumF can retain (poor) activity even in the wrong phosphorylation state or that minor amounts of protein undergo phosphorylation from other serine/threonine kinases from the surrogate hosts genetic background with certain promiscuity. Despite the proof that the presence of pumF is important for PUM biosynthesis, the precise function of PumF remains to be elucidated in future studies, since currently the kinase activity is not proven and a protein target is unknown. Furthermore, heterologous production of PUM was achieved; however, the yields were too low to use this strain as a plug-and-play production platform for PUM and its biosynthetic precursors. Therefore, it would be a long way to optimize production in heterologous strains and future work should continue to focus on WT producer strains, which are also genetically accessible and could be optimized in untargeted ways (i.e., random mutagenesis) and by targeted genetic engineering.