DISCUSSION YcaQ is the third alkylpurine DNA glycosylase to be identified in E. coli (50). Unlike Tag and AlkA, which excise only monoadducts during BER (51,52), YcaQ acts on crosslinked nucleobases to provide an alternative to NER-coupled ICL repair. The apparent specificity of YcaQ for cationic alkylpurines would limit the types of ICLs to be repaired to those formed by alkylation at purine N3- or N7 positions, such as nitrogen mustards. YcaQ showed a much greater activity toward unhooking NM-ICLs than other known alkylpurine DNA glycosylases. This is somewhat contrary to a previous report that AlkA and AAG act on mustard-treated DNA, although that study did not distinguish between ICL and monoadducts (53). Cells lacking ycaQ displayed a slight sensitivity towards mechlorethamine, but not MMS, consistent with the redundancy in repair mechanisms against methyl-DNA lesions (54). Repair of NM-ICLs in E. coli is known to depend on NER and HR pathways, as uvrA and recA mutants show extreme sensitivity towards crosslinking agents (55,56). The greater sensitivity of ΔuvrA versus ΔycaQ mutants to mechlorethamine shown here is consistent with NER/HR as the major ICL repair pathway for this type of lesion in E. coli. A glycosylase-mediated ICL unhooking pathway could provide an error-free ICL repair mechanism by potentially bypassing the requirement for error-prone TLS across from the monoadduct (15). However, our in vitro data indicate that both AlkZ and YcaQ unhook crosslinks from either side to generate opposing AP sites in a 1,3 orientation that can be incised by EndoIV. In the cell, opposing AP sites in such close proximity could potentially lead to a deleterious DSB. Generation of opposing AP sites by AlkZ/YcaQ is in stark contrast to the 5mC glycosylase DEMETER in plants that removes 5mC in hemi-methylated d(5mCG/CG) islands and is inhibited by closely spaced 5mC residues on opposite strands in fully methylated d(5mCG)2 sequences (57). Our data suggest a sequential mechanism of unhooking both sides of the ICL. We do not know if the enzyme dissociates and rebinds after the first unhooking event or whether an enzyme-DNA complex persists to make the second cut, although structural modeling of the AlkZ/DNA complex shows a potential for crosstalk between two enzymes bound on either side of the crosslink (15,20). It remains to be determined in a cellular context if YcaQ forms opposing AP sites or DSBs, or if the enzyme is instead regulated to avoid a detrimental outcome. It also remains to be determined what the downstream resolution of glycosylase-mediated repair is, although previous studies suggest that polB (DNA pol II) may be involved in a recombination-independent mechanism for repair of NM-ICLs in E. coli (55,56). In eukaryotes, the NEIL3 glycosylase was identified as an alternate ICL pathway to FA/NER and capable of unhooking ICLs derived from abasic sites and psoralen (13,58,59). NEIL3 and YcaQ are structurally unrelated and likely do not share the same mode of ICL recognition (20,60). ICL repair by the NEIL3 glycosylase is S-phase dependent and involves convergent replication forks (13,61), and its glycosylase domain has an intrinsic specificity for DNA damage at one particular orientation of forked structures (62). In contrast, the data presented here suggest that the bacterial AlkZ/YcaQ ICL glycosylase recognizes ICLs without regard to a specific DNA structure, consistent with ICL repair in bacteria occurring in the context of duplex DNA (3,63). Moreover, AlkZ’s preference for an AZB-ICL is likely the result of direct contact between the protein and AZB. Our AlkZ crystal structure modeled against AZB-DNA suggests that helix αI in the second wHTH motif is in proximity to make direct contact with the AZB moiety (Supplementary Figure S1) (20). This region differs in sequence between the Streptomyces and E. coli enzymes, consistent with its putative role in substrate specificity. Our results indicate that ycaQ expression is likely constitutive as it was not induced by either of the ICL or alkylating agents tested. Consistent with constitutive expression, ycaQ resides within a putative four-gene operon containing essential genes msbA and lpxK behind a σ70-dependent promoter (Supplementary Figure S6G) (64). Large scale proteomic studies in E. coli suggest that YcaQ protein levels are among the lower 25% for abundance, indicating it may be kept at low protein concentrations in the cell (65). Interestingly, the ycaQ operon also has a putative σ32-dependent (heat shock) promotor, indicating a potential role for ycaQ and this operon in a global stress response (66). High-throughput transcriptomic studies of E. coli under different stresses shows ycaQ expression is upregulated during heat and cold shock (67). These data argue that YcaQ does not have a specific substrate, but instead is a mechanism to unhook diverse ICLs arising from various bifunctional alkylating agents. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out the possibility that YcaQ plays a specific role in certain strains of E. coli or other related bacteria that produce genotoxic secondary metabolites during a stress response. For example, pks+ E. coli producing colibactin, an ICL agent associated with formation of colon cancer (68–74), likely have some form of self-resistance against the toxin. YcaQ may play that role in a manner similar to that of Streptomyces AlkZ for azinomycin or of the AlkD/YtkR2 glycosylases for the non-covalent ICL agent yatakemycin (14,34,35). Although more work is needed to understand the rationale for YcaQ involvement in ICL repair in E. coli and other bacteria, this work expands the role of DNA glycosylases and the BER pathway in repair of ICLs.