Discussion We show that S. tropica is able to inhibit the growth of both marine cyanobacteria and eukaryotic phototrophs by some, yet, unidentified mechanism (Fig. 1). This observation broadens the potential role and impact that members of the Salinispora genus have on marine microbial communities. Members of the three Salinispora species are widely distributed bacteria found in all tropical and subtropical oceans (Mincer et al., 2002; Bauermeister et al., 2018). While mostly inhabiting marine sediments, bacteria from this genus have also been isolated from the microbiota of seaweeds, marine sponges and more recently corals (Jensen et al., 2005; Asolkar et al., 2010; Ocampo‐Alvarez et al., 2020). In marine sponges, it is suggested they influence the sponge microbiota through the production of acyl homoserine lactone molecules and antibiotics (Singh et al., 2014; Bose et al., 2017). Similarly, different species of Salinispora were shown to possess distinct mechanisms to outcompete co‐occurring marine heterotrophs in sediments, that is through the production of siderophores to deplete iron or antimicrobial molecules (Patin et al., 2017; Tuttle et al., 2019), although no antimicrobial compound has yet been identified for S. tropica (Patin et al., 2018). We herein provide the first evidence that Salinispora might not only directly influence heterotrophic communities, but also kill both prokaryotic and eukaryotic phytoplankton to which they are exposed, for example when these sediment out of the water column (Guidi et al., 2016), grow in sunlit coastal sediments (Patin et al., 2017) or are part of the same coral‐associated microbiota (Ocampo‐Alvarez et al, 2020). In Salinispora, co‐culture has been employed but failed so far to result in the discovery of novel natural products from the genus. Patin and colleagues showed that S.arenicola and S. tropica strains exhibited antimicrobial activities against various marine heterotrophs (Patin et al., 2016, 2017, 2018). Although some of these interactions were found to be caused by already known bioactive compounds (e.g. siderophores), several of those were mediated by an uncharacterized mechanism and overall no new natural product was identified (Patin et al., 2016). In a following manuscript, the interactions between S. tropica CNY‐681 and several heterotrophs were further explored by MS/MS networking analysis (Patin et al., 2018). The networks generated revealed unknown molecular families unique to the co‐cultures but they were either (i) not proven to be produced by S. tropica rather than the co‐inoculated heterotroph or (ii) related to the already characterized siderophore desferrioxamine E (Patin et al., 2018). Using metabolomics, we here characterized the production of cryptic metabolites in the type strain S. tropica CNB‐440T in response to the presence of a range of prokaryotic and eukaryotic phytoplankton species. Molecules with identical m/z were never reported in the literature and they were also distinct from the molecular families described by Patin et al. when S. tropica was grown with marine heterotrophs (Patin et al., 2018). This finding confirms the overlooked potential of co‐culturing Salinispora specifically with phytoplankton to elicit the production of novel secondary metabolites. While we were successful in identifying and obtaining the molecular formulae of the cryptic metabolites produced in response to phytoplanktonic photosynthate (Fig. 2, Table 2), we were unable to isolate and identify the compound responsible for the antimicrobial effect on the marine phototrophs by using traditional bioactivity‐guided assays with HPLC fractionation of crude extracts (data not shown). This mechanism proved similarly elusive in previous studies, where S. tropica showed an antimicrobial activity on marine heterotrophs, but the molecule responsible was not identified (Patin et al., 2016; Patin et al., 2018). The parallelism between our observations and those described in the literature suggests that the active compound(s) may be the same. We reason that the compound’s instability, and/or synergic effect of several molecules required for activity, could explain the difficulty in identifying the antimicrobial agent. For instance, the large number of structurally related metabolites resulting from the chemical reaction of salinosporamide with various compounds (i.e. water as shown in Denora et al., 2007; and Tris in this study) may support this hypothesis, as the antimicrobial molecule may be similarly unstable. The diversity of products arising from a single BGC may also be due to the promiscuity of the biosynthetic enzymes utilizing structurally related primary precursors. This results in a range of compounds, each produced at lower titres than a single natural product, and ultimately hamper the isolation of sufficient amounts of the compounds of interest. Whatever the case, we show that S. tropica can produce a broad‐range antibiotic able to affect both unicellular prokaryotes and eukaryotes alike, such as the marine diatom and coccolithophore tested in our study. Such a broad‐range antimicrobial could suggest a mode of action affecting a common target present in both types of cells such as the proteasome, a proteolytic complex present in the three domains of life (Becker and Darwin, 2016). Exploring the proteome of S. tropica exposed to photosynthate, we detected proteins encoded by almost all its BGCs, including most of its orphan BGCs (Fig. 3). Notably, the sal BGC, producing the salinosporamide compound, was one of the most highly expressed BGC as most of its proteins were detected with high‐relative abundance. This finding is in agreement with previous studies that have shown by transcriptomics that the BGC sal is highly and constitutively expressed when grown in nutrient‐rich A1 medium (Amos et al., 2017). Also, the high expression of this BGC correlated with a noticeable detection of salinosporamide derivatives by LC‐MS. Therefore, the abundant detection of several orphans BGC proteins, including those from pks3 and nrps1 BGCs, may be promising candidates responsible for the biosynthesis of the cryptic metabolites detected by LC‐MS and, potentially, the antimicrobial activity observed on co‐cultured phototrophs. The proteins detected from the BGC nrps1 are essential enzymes involved in non‐ribosomal peptide biosynthesis, that is A4X2Q0, a non‐ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) made of a C‐A‐PCP domain; A4X2Q2, a ketoreductase domain‐containing protein; A4X2R4, an adenylation domain‐containing protein; and A4X2R5, a condensation domain‐containing protein made of C‐PCP‐TE domain. The detection of these proteins therefore strongly suggests the actual synthesis of the non‐ribosomal peptide and could well be the novel cryptic metabolites 4, 6 and 7 detected by LC‐MS. The molecules indeed include four nitrogen atoms in their predicted molecular formulae (Table 2) and four identified A‐domains, which are responsible for the selection and activation of the amino‐acids monomers incorporated into the non‐ribosomal peptide, are encoded in the nrps1 BGC. Interestingly, while the substrate specificity of A4X2Q0’s A‐domain is alanine, the one of A4X2R4 and the two others could not be predicted. We also show that the proteins encoded by the nrps1 BGC were more abundantly detected with photosynthate (Fig. 4), which is consistent with our observation that the detection of the molecules is conditional to the presence of phytoplankton or their photosynthate. This correlation supports the orphan nrps1 as a promising candidate for the production of the cryptic compounds and, potentially, the antimicrobial activity observed on co‐cultured phototrophs. Further work is however required to elucidate the structure of this series of cryptic metabolites. From this same BGC we also detected a highly abundant ATP‐dependent Clp protease proteolytic subunit (ClpP, A4X2S2) that may be providing S. tropica with self‐resistance against the nrps1 peptides. Virtually all organisms across the tree of life have a system for targeted proteolysis for protein turnover, with most bacteria, mitochondria and chloroplasts relying on a ClpP‐type proteasome while eukaryotes, archaea and some actinobacteria typically possess the homologous 20S proteasome structure (Becker and Darwin, 2016; Snoberger et al., 2017). The ClpP proteasome is known to be the target for certain antibiotics, including the novel acyldepsipeptide (ADEP) class (Kirstein et al., 2009), and it is common to find alternative ClpP proteasomes encoded nearby the antibiotic‐producing BGC to confer resistance to the host cell (Thomy et al., 2019). In a similar fashion, salinosporamide A is a 20S proteasome inhibitor, to which S. tropica is resistant because of an extra copy of the proteasome beta subunit gene within the salinosporamide‐producing cluster (Kale et al., 2011). We can thus reasonably infer from the presence of clpP in the nrps1 BGC that it is likely to produce an antibiotic targeting the ClpP proteasome, a class of antimicrobial compounds that has recently gained considerable attention as an attractive option to tackle multidrug resistant pathogens (Fig. 5; Momose and Kawada, 2016; Culp and Wright, 2017; Moreno‐Cinos et al., 2019). We here provide the first proteomic evidence that S. tropica’s nrps1 is active and may produce a promising antimicrobial compound acting as a ClpP proteasome inhibitor. The synthesis of such an antibiotic would explain the antimicrobial effect of S. tropica on all marine phototrophs tested in our study as they all rely on the ClpP proteolytic machinery (Andersson et al., 2009; Jones et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2018). Additional evidence, such as genetic inactivation of the nrps1 BGC, will confirm this mechanism. Fig. 5Interaction of Salinispora tropica with phytoplankton. Marine phototrophs release photosynthate that triggers the biosynthesis of novel cryptic metabolites in S. tropica. S. tropica produces an unknown antimicrobial molecule that kills phytoplankton. The proposed mechanism of the antimicrobial metabolite as well as the activity of the nrps1 product are depicted (green and purple boxes, respectively). We hypothesize that the BGC nrps1 may produce a ClpP proteasome inhibitor, to which S. tropica would be resistant because of an immunity protein encoded within the BGC, similarly to what is known for sal/salinosporamide. The nrps1‐encoded proteasome inhibitor could kill the phototrophs by preventing protein turnover, leading to cell death. Interaction of Salinispora tropica with phytoplankton. Marine phototrophs release photosynthate that triggers the biosynthesis of novel cryptic metabolites in S. tropica. S. tropica produces an unknown antimicrobial molecule that kills phytoplankton. The proposed mechanism of the antimicrobial metabolite as well as the activity of the nrps1 product are depicted (green and purple boxes, respectively). We hypothesize that the BGC nrps1 may produce a ClpP proteasome inhibitor, to which S. tropica would be resistant because of an immunity protein encoded within the BGC, similarly to what is known for sal/salinosporamide. The nrps1‐encoded proteasome inhibitor could kill the phototrophs by preventing protein turnover, leading to cell death. We show that the photosynthate released by primary producers influences the biosynthetic capacities of S. tropica, activating the expression of several orphan BGCs and inducing the production of novel metabolites. Our metabolomics analysis further confirmed the potential of co‐culturing for natural product discovery as we identified novel cryptic secondary metabolites, although future work is required to elucidate the structure of the new molecules. Finally, our study extends the pool of known compounds produced by the genus Salinispora and pioneers the use of phototrophs as a promising strategy to trigger novel natural products from marine actinobacteria. We also provide a valuable insight into the biosynthetic potential of S. tropica with our proteomic dataset, which reveals the nrps1 BGC as a promising candidate for antibiotic production.