3. Discussion Knowledge concerning the metabolic capability of a (fungal) pathogen can aid in our understanding of how the pathogenic process may be impacted by environmental and host nutrients that can be made available and used by the invading fungus. For instance, an important virulence attribute of the human pathogenic fungus Candida albicans is its ability to scavenge oligopeptides and amino acids from the host environment through expression of secreted aspartic proteases and a suite of dedicated oligopeptide transporters and amino acid permeases [42]. Zinc uptake was recently shown to play an important role in the fitness and pathogenicity of the fungus, Blastomyces dermatiditis [43]. Similarly, some plant pathogenic fungi such as Botrytis cinerea utilize the carbon compound mannitol to quench ROS-mediated plant defenses [44]. In the present study, we assessed the metabolic utilization patterns, chemical sensitivities, and corresponding cellular growth phenotypes of the laurel wilt pathogen and ambrosia beetle symbiont, Raffaelea lauricola. Consistent with previous more limited studies [45,46], R. lauricola showed a restricted carbon utilization profile, with growth seen mainly on “simple” carbohydrates (e.g., glucose, galactose, fructose) and on di- and tri-, and polysaccharides. Intriguingly, the most robust growth was observed on the animal-based protein hydrolysate, gelatin, potentially due to its high nitrogen content [47]. Gelatin has been used as a model for plant cell wall-associated structural proteins, some of which are enriched in hydroxyproline and contain repetitive amino acid sequences [48]. Although speculative, gelatin-like peptides may also be found in the beetle host [49]. R. lauricola efficiently grew on many of the simple nitrogenous compounds presented, such as ammonia and nitrate, and particularly well on urea, putrescine (a simple polyamine), and d-glucosamine (an amino sugar). Growth was also improved on the nucleotides adenine and guanosine, and to a lesser extent guanine, but not on thymine or cytosine. A clear preference for growth on certain amino acids and short peptides was noted, including arginine, serine, glutamine, glutamate, and methionine. The finding that methionine, when presented within short peptides, can support strong growth by R. lauricola is somewhat surprising given that this amino acid was not utilized efficiently by Ophiostomataceae species [46], although methionine as a constituent of a small peptide was not directly investigated. This is further intriguing since some Raffaelea species may not be capable of synthesizing methionine themselves, suggesting a reliance on exogenous methionine [45]. Extracellular amino acid sensing and utilization impacts both basic cellular growth and fungal pathogenicity, with regulatory circuits such as the nitrogen catabolite repression (NCR), target of rapamycin (TOR) and SPS and transceptor-mediated amino acid sensing dedicated to perceiving and responding to extracellular amino acids [50]. As such, these utilization patterns may hold useful insights into how R. lauricola is able to establish and maintain infections in its plant hosts and/or form a symbiotic interaction with its insect partner. That many phosphorus and sulfur substrates improved growth is consistent with recent observations from transcriptomic data that alternative sulfur uptake and assimilation pathways are coordinately up-regulated during infection by R. lauricola in plant hosts [51], and lend evidence that sulfur metabolism may play an important role in R. lauricola infection and persistence in plant hosts. The more limited growth observed on substrates that act as nutrient supplements, e.g., orotic acid, cytosine, and nicotinamide, may suggest a relatively limited range of catabolic pathways by which R. lauricola can utilize such substrates, paralleling findings by other groups that have suggested that ambrosia fungi may lack many functional enzymes necessary for the degradation and/or utilization of substrates within biosynthetic pathways [45,52]. Indeed, Raffaelea species may lack genes encoding components needed to synthesize some essential vitamins, and these compounds may be supplied by bacteria and/or yeasts occupying the ambrosia microbiome [45]. In this light, the strong growth of R. lauricola on several vitamin supplements, including nicotinamide, d-biotin, and folic acid may support the idea of some degree of reliance on exogenous sources for these compounds. Conditions examining osmolyte parameters showed a clear preference for growth on sodium sulfate, sodium lactate, ammonium sulfate, and sodium nitrate by R. lauricola. Some of these compounds, such a nitrates and sulfates, would likely be encountered by R. lauricola in the sapwood of lauraceous species, as xylem elements form the main pathway for mineral nutrients to travel from root to shoot in plants [53,54]. Growth in media amended to different pH values confirmed the previously described growth sensitivity of R. lauricola to neutral/alkaline condition (poor growth at pH > 7, [39]). Intriguingly, our data revealed that the addition of certain amino acids (l-leucine and l-norleucine, and to lesser extents l-tryptophan and l-valine) could rescue the alkaline sensitivity even at pH 9.5. This may reflect the ability of R. lauricola to deaminate these compounds, thus releasing ammonia into the media and reducing the pH to acceptable levels. Similarly, R. lauricola was capable of growth at pH 8 in the presence of ammonium sulfate. Such results warrant further investigation regarding their relevance to R. lauricola growth under environmentally relevant conditions, and what role acidification of the environment may play in the pathogenesis and symbiosis of this organism. Reports describing the pH of sapwood in lauraceous plants under physiological conditions are largely absent; however, studies conducted in other herbaceous and woody plant species have found xylem pH values ranging between 5.5–6.5, and also that alkalization and acidification of xylem sap are important responses to a number of stressors including drought and impaired sap flow [55,56]. A number of amino acids, including leucine, have been reported from xylem sap, suggesting that these compounds may be encountered by R. lauricola during infection, and could potentially be utilized to alter the pH of the host environment [57]. Additionally, the observed growth on X-linked compounds (which test for the activities of specific enzymes), indicates that R. lauricola produces esterases, α- and β-galactosidases, α- and β-glucuronidases, β-glucosamidases, β-galactosamindases, α-mannosidases, alkaline-phosphatases, and aryl-sulfatases. With respect to X-caprylate, which showed poor growth in our assays, we cannot differentiate between the inability of this fungus to cleave the substrate and/or the potential toxicity of the resulting product (C8), which our data shows inhibits R. lauricola growth. R. lauricola was very sensitive to inhibitors of enzymes involved in essential biosynthetic pathways, e.g., azaserine, a structural analog of glutamine that inhibits enzymes involved in purine biosynthesis, hydroxyurea, which inhibits the enzyme ribonucleotide reductase, zaragozic acid, a squalene synthase inhibitor, and dequalinium chloride, whose multiple mechanisms of action include being a mitochondrial NADH:ubiquinone reductase inhibitor [58,59,60,61]. Interestingly, R. lauricola showed higher sensitivities to these compounds than to known selection agents for this fungus such as hygromycin B, which showed highly variable suppression of R. lauricola growth. In addition to carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur compounds, we assessed the ability of R. lauricola to grow on various fatty acids ranging from C4-C18. Fatty acid utilization has been shown to be critical for formation of infectious structures in a wide range of pathogenic fungi including animal, insect, and plant pathogens [23,33,62], and lipid utilization acts as a nexus mediating fungal virulence and responses to stress [63]. Complete inhibition of growth was seen for C4, C8, and C10 fatty acids, suggesting that the lower range of fatty acid chain lengths impose fungicidal or fungistatic effects on this species. Fungal inhibition by free fatty acids is a well-documented, with reports of many plant- and animal-pathogenic fungi such as Botrytis cinerea, Fusarium oxysporum, and Candida albicans by fatty acids of different chain length and degree of saturation [64,65,66,67]. Antifungal free fatty acids are typically believed to act by becoming incorporated into the fungal cell membrane, thus increasing membrane fluidity and leading to destabilization and cell death; however, many other cellular pathways may be involved in these mechanisms and remain to be uncovered [64]. Interestingly, the antifungal efficiency of fatty acids is generally considered to increase along with their chain length; however, for R. lauricola, we found that shorter chain-length fatty acids (chain-length C10 and below) provide the strongest antifungal activity, while the fungus is more capable of managing exposure to longer chain-length (> C12) fatty acids without experiencing significant alterations in growth rate. Thus, our data indicate that R. lauricola displays robust growth on fatty acids greater than C12, up until C18, the highest chain length tested, although some differences in overall colony morphology was noted on the different fatty acids. The ability of R. lauricola to cope with the presence of longer chain fatty acids may reflect an evolutionary strategy to survive within blocked xylem elements containing gels high in certain lipid species, although the lipid composition of laurel wilt-infected trees has not been investigated to our knowledge. As fatty acid utilization is directly linked to the formation of lipid droplets (LDs), a series of fluorescent lipid dyes including Nile Red, BODIPY, Lipi-Red, Lipi-Blue, and Lipi-Green were assessed for their ability to visualize LDs. Although all dyes were observed to stain lipid droplets in R. lauricola cells to differing degrees, the Lipi-Blue, -Green, and -Red dyes were seen to perform more poorly than Nile Red and BODIPY dyes, as indicated by qualitative confocal imagery. Lipi-Green showed only faint staining, which appeared more diffuse within the cell than the other dyes, especially at earlier time points. Lipi-Blue was also relatively faint; however, its localization within the cell appeared to correspond much more closely with LDs, especially at earlier time points. Lipi-Red staining of R. lauricola appeared very faint and diffuse in earlier time points, but image quality was seen to dramatically improve when using cells derived from later timepoints. By comparison, both Nile Red and BODIPY showed strong fluorescence localized almost entirely within structures consistent with being LDs across all time points and preliminary fluorescence quantification demonstrated a clear induction of LDs in oleic acid-treated samples compared to untreated samples. These observed differences in lipid droplet staining efficiency may be the result of differences in membrane permeability or lipid affinity between the different dyes, although further investigation may be necessary to confirm this. In some instances, e.g., cells grown in unamended media (PDB), Nile Red staining was considerably fainter at the 0 and 12 h time points. Fluorescence signals from Nile Red samples were also observed to fade much more rapidly than those stained with BODIPY, a result that is consistent with what has been reported by others [37,68,69]. BODIPY showed strong and consistent fluorescence across all time points observed as well as relatively low photobleaching qualities, making it a superior dye for use in R. lauricola lipid droplet studies. Fungal cells grown in the presence of exogenous fatty acids (PDB + C12–C18) displayed notable differences in LD numbers, size, and distribution as compared to cells grown under control (PDB) conditions. Oleic acid-treated cells were seen to accumulate a significant number of LDs as compared to untreated cells, whereas palmitic and myristic acid displayed varying patterns of LD accumulation that was intermediate between control and oleic acid-induced samples. Lauric acid-treated samples displayed the most notable differences in lipid mediated staining, as well as differences in cell morphology. R. lauricola grown on lauric acid appeared stunted in size, with bulging hyphae and with diffuse fluorescent staining using either Nile Red or BODIPY across the entire surface area of the cell, with few, if any, clear (punctate) LDs apparent. As fatty acids with chain length smaller than lauric acid (< C12) were toxic, it is likely that lauric acid is at the edge of toxicity for R. laurciola. Lipid buildup within the cell membrane, as has been suggested previously as a primary mechanism for fatty acid cytotoxicity in fungi, could explain the bulging appearance of lauric acid-treated cells, as well as their diffuse lipid staining [65,66]. Alternatively, fatty acids may also accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum, where fatty acids are converted into phosphatidic acid (PA) before conversion to diacylglycerols (DAGs) and triacylglycerols (TAGs) for LD formation, giving the appearance of diffuse staining within the cell. Such a buildup of short-chain fatty acids within the ER may be the result of lauric acid not being utilized efficiently by enzymes responsible for conversion of lipids to PA (and subsequently to DAGs and TAGs), as many of these enzymes have been shown to have specific affinities for fatty acids with longer chain-lengths [64]. An inability to process these shorter chain-length fatty acids may, thus, be one potential explanation for their observed cytotoxicity on R. lauricola cells. The ability of Nile Red and BODIPY to show different lipid droplet physiologies for lauric acid-treated cells, especially in later time points, may provide clues to how this fatty acid is being processed and incorporated into R. lauricola cells, with future experiments targeting the mechanisms underlying the observed lipid droplet phenotype warranted. In conclusion, we present an in depth metabolic and physiological profiling of the laurel wilt pathogen and ambrosia beetle symbiont, R. lauricola. These data can be used to complement existing genomic and transcriptomic datasets, allowing for genotype to phenotype observations of important metabolic and physiological traits such as substrate utilization, chemical sensitivities, and resistance to environmental stressors [51,70]. Coupled to more recent methods for the genetic manipulation of R. lauricola [41], specific hypotheses can be tested on the contributions of various physiological aspects of the fungus to virulence versus symbioses. Despite its varied lifestyles, our data show that the metabolic capacity of R. lauricola has certain restrictions, suggesting that specific mechanisms or pathways may be important for this fungus to persist in its disparate hosts. Fatty acid utilization and methods for LD visualization were developed that can be used to further probe the roles of these pathways in R. lauricola growth and development, and our data provides a foundation for dissecting the physiological parameters and requirements of R. lauricola as a plant pathogen and insect symbiont.