Results and Discussion The Genomes of Anaerobic Gut Fungi Encode Diverse Biosynthetic Enzymes for Natural Products and Antimicrobial Peptides. Previously, we isolated and sequenced the genomes of four species of anaerobic gut fungi from the early-branching fungal class Neocallimastigomycetes (14). Using antiSMASH version 3.0 (19) to mine the genomes of Anaeromyces robustus, Caecomyces churrovis, Neocallimastix californiae, and Piromyces finnis, we uncovered 146 genes encoding enzymes responsible for the synthesis of various classes of secondary metabolites (Fig. 1). These enzymes include canonical classes such as polyketide synthases (PKSs) and nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs), as well as putative classes based on the ClusterFinder (20) algorithm. The number of predicted core biosynthetic genes, or backbone genes, in all four strains as a proportion of total genes is commensurate with the prolific secondary metabolite-producing aspergilli (SI Appendix, Table S1), which contain roughly 50 to 70 backbone genes per strain. Neocallimastigomycetes surpass other members of Chytridiomycota by an order of magnitude in the number of backbone genes per strain (SI Appendix, Table S1). Fig. 1.Anaerobic fungal genomes reveal putative natural products of many different types. The genomes of anaerobic fungi (13) were mined for their biosynthetic gene clusters and cluster types by antiSMASH 3.0 (19) using profile Hidden Markov Models with the ClusterFinder option (20). *Cf = gene clusters identified by ClusterFinder. The ClusterFinder algorithm extends the secondary metabolite search to include biosynthetic gene clusters of unknown types based on the occurrence of common protein family domains inside and outside of the cluster (20). Anaerobic fungal genomes reveal putative natural products of many different types. The genomes of anaerobic fungi (13) were mined for their biosynthetic gene clusters and cluster types by antiSMASH 3.0 (19) using profile Hidden Markov Models with the ClusterFinder option (20). *Cf = gene clusters identified by ClusterFinder. The ClusterFinder algorithm extends the secondary metabolite search to include biosynthetic gene clusters of unknown types based on the occurrence of common protein family domains inside and outside of the cluster (20). Surprisingly, antiSMASH identified nine bacteriocins, or antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) typically produced by bacteria (21), in the genomes of anaerobic fungi: two predicted peptides were found in N. californiae and four unique peptide sequences were found in C. churrovis. We validated the antiSMASH predictions against other tools specifically designed to identify AMPs from sequence data (SI Appendix, Supplementary Text). Namely, we queried the six unique bacteriocin amino acid sequences using Antimicrobial Peptide Calculator and Predictor (22) and CAMPSign (23). Although none of the sequences belonged to the 45 AMP families in CAMPSign, subsequent BLAST to the AMP Databases indicated that all sequences shared at least 31.6% identity to putative bacteriocins or lactococcin 972 (24) (SI Appendix, Dataset S1). The bacteriocins located on C. churrovis scaffolds 90 and 616 and N. californiae scaffold 388 were transcribed but not detected in the proteome. Taken together, these results indicate that both C. churrovis and N. californiae genomes encode potential AMPs in addition to an arsenal of PKSs and NRPSs. To further affirm the biosynthetic genes of anaerobic gut fungi, we compared the antiSMASH predictions to the secondary metabolite genes predicted by the Secondary Metabolite Unknown Regions Finder (SMURF) algorithm (25) in the Joint Genome Institute (JGI) MycoCosm portal (26) (SI Appendix, Dataset S2). For all strains except A. robustus, antiSMASH, with the ClusterFinder algorithm enabled, predicted more biosynthetic genes because it detected a wider array of natural product classes than SMURF, including bacteriocins and putative classes such as fatty acid and saccharide derivatives. For A. robustus, SMURF predicted an additional five PKS-like biosynthetic genes. Despite these differences (discussed in greater detail the SI Appendix, Supplementary Text), the majority of the regions on each scaffold predicted by antiSMASH or SMURF to harbor biosynthetic genes were the same. A total of 90% of the backbone genes predicted by SMURF in each fungal strain were located on the same or an overlapping scaffold region where antiSMASH also identified biosynthetic genes. The Biosynthetic Genes of Anaerobic Fungi Are Isolated or Cluster with Nonconventional Genes. The biosynthetic enzymes of fungal secondary metabolism are typically, but not always, encoded by genes locally clustered on the chromosome with other genes in the biological pathway, such as genes that encode tailoring enzymes, transporters, self-resistance genes, and transcription factors (27, 28). AntiSMASH predicted cluster accessory genes based on GlimmerHMM (29) and up to 20 kbp intergenic distance for the outermost gene (30). Based on RNA-seq data, antiSMASH was a poor predictor of the accessory genes. In order to delineate the accessory genes of each cluster, we relied on a variety of gene prediction models, including GeneMark (31, 32) and fgenesh (33), and only included genes that were validated via RNA sequencing (Materials and
Methods). The curated gene clusters are presented in the Secondary Metabolite Clusters feature of the MycoCosm portal (26) as well as in SI Appendix, Dataset S3. Approximately 60% of the backbone genes with RNA-seq support are located in clusters of two or more genes, and 40% of the backbone genes are isolated (neighbored by genes greater than 10 kbp apart or by genes with poor RNA-seq coverage). For the backbone genes of anaerobic fungi that are located in clusters, some of the neighboring genes are not typically found in either bacterial or other fungal biosynthetic gene clusters. Many of the neighboring genes encode hypothetical proteins or lack any homology-based annotations. However, in some cases, the neighboring genes include solute transporters and enzymes responsible for posttranslational modifications (e.g., phosphorylation and palmitoylation), which are more commonly observed in biosynthetic gene clusters. Notably, only the PKS-like gene cluster of P. finnis located on scaffold 39 (core gene MycoCosm Protein Id 358210) includes a putative transcription factor (414496). However, the A. robustus PKS located on scaffold 258 and N. californiae PKS-like gene cluster on scaffold 59 both include proteins with ankyrin repeats (A. robustus 270780 and N. californiae 668532) that may be bANK family transcription factors found in several other fungi (34–36). The predicted gut fungal proteins do not match the motif of basic amino acids found in other bANK proteins (34, 35, 37), but this motif is not required for transcription factor activity (37). Nonconventional neighboring genes that are present in more than one gene cluster include C-type lectins (N. californiae Protein Ids 502167 and 674020 and P. finnis 349079), peptidases (C. churrovis 519541 and P. finnis 241287), and calmodulin-related proteins of the EF-hand superfamily (A. robustus 27040 and C. churrovis 200925). Although the functions of these genes are unknown, it is possible that they may be self-resistance genes. Self-resistance genes have been observed in both bacterial and fungal biosynthetic gene clusters (38, 39). Another candidate self-resistance gene is C. churrovis 17006, encoding ribosomal protein L19e (specific to eukaryotes and archaea), which suggests that the backbone enzyme, encoded by Protein Id 17094, may synthesize a compound with activity against another eukaryote. It has been suggested, but not proven, that variant copies of the ribosomal L11 protein may be self-resistance genes for Bacillus cereus American Type Culture Collection 14579, which is a producer of thiocillin (40). The function of these nonconventional neighboring genes in the gene clusters of anaerobic fungi and whether they have a role in gut fungal secondary metabolism remains to be determined. Biosynthetic Gene Sequences Support Horizontal Gene Transfer from Other Rumen Microbes as a Mechanism of Acquisition. We compared the similarity of the genes encoding core biosynthetic enzymes to other organisms to deduce the novelty and phylogenetic origin of the genes. The top-scoring BLAST+ (41) hits (Fig. 2) for 20% of the total core biosynthetic genes were other fungal genes (protein sequence identity >30%, coverage >25%, and E-value <1 × 10−8). The majority of the homologous genes were hypothetical or uncharacterized proteins from other early-diverging fungi like chytrids, with a few instances of genes from higher-order fungi. A total of 80% of the homologous genes from higher-order fungi were from basidiomycetes, possibly due to the ancestral intake of basidiomycete fungi with forage by the herbivore hosts and subsequent horizontal gene transfer (HGT). However, the top hits for 63% of the gut fungal core biosynthetic genes appeared to be of bacterial origin rather than fungal. Fig. 2.Biosynthetic genes from anaerobic fungi show the greatest similarity to bacteria. Core biosynthetic genes with at least three domains identified by antiSMASH were queried against NCBI’s nonredundant protein database using BLAST+. Top hits (largest bitscore) with E-value less than 1 × 10−8, greater than 30% identity, and greater than 25% coverage were classified for each biosynthetic gene according to taxonomy. Biosynthetic genes from anaerobic fungi show the greatest similarity to bacteria. Core biosynthetic genes with at least three domains identified by antiSMASH were queried against NCBI’s nonredundant protein database using BLAST+. Top hits (largest bitscore) with E-value less than 1 × 10−8, greater than 30% identity, and greater than 25% coverage were classified for each biosynthetic gene according to taxonomy. Due to the high level of HGT associated the carbohydrate active enzymes of Neocallimastigomycetes (14), we probed whether any core biosynthetic genes may have also arisen in these fungi via HGT from bacteria. Phylogenetic trees of the PKS ketosynthase domains and NRPS condensations domains were constructed. These domains append additional subunits to the growing product chain, and they have been shown to be a good proxy for the entire biosynthetic gene when constructing phylogenies (42–45). HGT with bacteria was not supported for the PKS genes, since no ketosynthase domains nested within bacterial sequences and only 10% of domains were sister to bacteria. However, 44% of the fungal NRPS condensation domains were sister to or nested within domains from bacterial genes (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). Many of these bacteria are native to the rumen, such as Clostridium cellulovorans, thus supporting the hypothesis that some of the biosynthetic genes were likely horizontally transferred from bacteria. The majority of the transcribed NRPS genes were not part of a gene cluster (SI Appendix, Dataset S3). Therefore, at least some of the fungal NRPS genes may have been acquired by HGT of a single bacterial gene or transfer of an operon and subsequent loss of neighboring genes. Similarly, phylogenies were constructed for the bacteriocins (SI Appendix, Figs. S2–S7). The putative bacteriocins were sister to Ciliophora, Firmicutes, or Actinobacteria (SI Appendix, Figs. S2 and S5–S7), with the exception of C. churrovis bacteriocins on scaffolds 90 and 616, which were most closely related to eukaryotes from Rhizaria (SI Appendix, Figs. S3 and S4). Therefore, the gut fungal bacteriocins may have been acquired from protozoa or bacteria in the rumen. There are many instances where HGT has been supported as the mechanism of acquisition of biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) between bacteria and fungi (43, 46–49) as well as between fungi (50), though such BGC HGT mechanisms have not been previously characterized in the rumen. However, the case for HGT is not as definitive for the bacteriocins as for the NRPSs, since in order to identify homologs, it was necessary to relax the E-value threshold to 0.1 and expand the search databases to include the Marine Microbial Eukaryote Transcriptome Sequencing Project (MMETSP) (51) (Materials and
Methods). Nevertheless, it is clear that some of the genetic potential for natural products present in gut fungal genomes may be due to the complex microbial community in which they evolved. Since 20% of the total biosynthetic genes were similar in sequence to other fungi, we investigated whether similarities existed in the regulation of secondary metabolism. Velvet regulatory proteins, which are characterized by a velvet domain ∼150 amino acids long, are known to coordinate development with secondary metabolism in other fungi, typically in complex with the methyltransferase LaeA and other velvet proteins (52, 53). Homologs of the developmental regulator vosA gene of A. nidulans (54, 55), which contains a velvet domain at the N terminus of the protein, were present in the C. churrovis (MycoCosm protein Ids 623244 and 624976), N. californiae (112212), and P. finnis (179530) genomes. These proteins have a primary region of homology centered at the velvet domain, with some conserved amino acids distal to the velvet domain (SI Appendix, Table S2 and Datasets S4–S6). Genes containing the velvet domain have been found in the genomes of other species of Chytridiomycota, such as the frog pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (53). However, the anaerobic gut fungi are unique among the chytrids in that their genomes contain not only velvet homologs but also the biosynthetic machinery for secondary metabolism. Thus, the development and secondary metabolism of anaerobic gut fungi may be regulated by a velvet domain–containing protein acting in concert with other proteins. At present, it is not known whether the velvet proteins form a complex with a LaeA-like methyltransferase, similar to filamentous fungi. Polyketide Synthases Are Conserved between Genera of Anaerobic Gut Fungi. Although some of the core biosynthetic genes of anaerobic gut fungi are homologous to bacteria or higher fungi, the majority of PKSs are unique to the anaerobic gut fungi (SI Appendix, Dataset S7). On average, the PKS genes only share 34% amino acid identity to their top-scoring homolog, excluding Neocallimastigomycetes, and the highest similarity was only 39% (C. churrovis PKS on scaffold 118). We hypothesize that PKS genes present in multiple strains of gut fungi have important biological functions that confer fitness to anaerobic gut fungi, either by promoting their unique life cycle or distancing microbial competitors. A total of 23 iterative type I PKS genes of four or more enzymatic domains were identified by antiSMASH across all four fungal strains. These 23 PKS genes group into six PKS families by OrthoFinder (56). The complete OrthoFinder results, including additional genes identified as PKSs by SMURF, some of which were categorized as ClusterFinder fatty acids by antiSMASH, are presented in SI Appendix, Table S3. All of the families have antiSMASH-predicted genes in three or more strains, and PKS families 1, 2, and 4 are represented across all four strains. The corresponding gene clusters of the PKSs contain orthologous neighboring genes (Fig. 3 and SI Appendix, Dataset S3), which suggests that the polyketides in each family may serve a common function. A phylogenetic tree of the PKS genes of A. robustus, C. churrovis, N. californiae, and P. finnis, shown in SI Appendix, Fig. S8, affirms the close evolutionary relationships between the PKS genes of different fungal genera. All of the PKS genes are transcribed during the in vitro cultivation described previously (13, 57). Fig. 3.Many PKS families are conserved across genera of Neocallimastigomycetes. A total of 23 PKS genes predicted by antiSMASH across four fungal strains (vertical axis) can be represented in six PKS families (horizontal axis) as grouped by OrthoFinder (56). Only one member per species is depicted in the figure. Neighboring orthologous genes in each cluster are defined as bidirectional top-scoring BLASTp hits from filtered model proteins between genomes with E-value threshold of 10−5 and are indicated by matching colors in each PKS family. No color signifies the gene lacks a corresponding ortholog in the cluster. Full annotations of accessory genes are available in SI Appendix, Dataset S3. Triangle: PKS; Circle: posttranslational modification enzyme; asterisk: multiple genes depicted as a single gene; diamond: transporter; square: all other genes. Many PKS families are conserved across genera of Neocallimastigomycetes. A total of 23 PKS genes predicted by antiSMASH across four fungal strains (vertical axis) can be represented in six PKS families (horizontal axis) as grouped by OrthoFinder (56). Only one member per species is depicted in the figure. Neighboring orthologous genes in each cluster are defined as bidirectional top-scoring BLASTp hits from filtered model proteins between genomes with E-value threshold of 10−5 and are indicated by matching colors in each PKS family. No color signifies the gene lacks a corresponding ortholog in the cluster. Full annotations of accessory genes are available in SI Appendix, Dataset S3. Triangle: PKS; Circle: posttranslational modification enzyme; asterisk: multiple genes depicted as a single gene; diamond: transporter; square: all other genes. To probe the conservation of neighboring genes in PKS gene clusters, we compared the PKS gene clusters from PKS family 1 (Fig. 4). Six genes were conserved between C. churrovis and A. robustus, and three genes were conserved between N. californiae and P. finnis. Across all four strains, the PKS gene and a gene of unknown function containing a WD-(trptophan-aspartic acid) 40 repeat were conserved. The PKS gene was present in two copies in the N. californiae genome: one copy on scaffold 26 and the second on scaffold 182. The gene cluster on scaffold 182 included Protein Id 705610, a Rap1-GTPase–activating protein, which was an ortholog of A. robustus Protein Id 283391. All constituent genes in these gene clusters were transcriptionally active. It is possible that these gene clusters constitute a polyketide biosynthesis pathway, but these gene clusters could also be an artifact of regions of conserved genomic synteny between fungal strains. Regardless of whether the PKS gene products independently synthesize a polyketide or are part of a more complex biosynthetic pathway, the conservation of the PKS gene suggests that the polyketide may be biologically important. One possibility is that the polyketide regulates the complex life cycle of anaerobic gut fungi. In the life cycle of anaerobic gut fungi, motile zoospores encyst into plant biomass and grow into a vegetative state, which develops reproductive sacs called sporangia that bear many zoospores (11). Secondary metabolites are known to regulate morphology and differentiation in other fungi, especially sporulation in ascomycetes (17). Fig. 4.A PKS gene cluster is conserved among four strains of anaerobic gut fungi. Regions 50 bp and larger of at least 35% identity are highlighted in gray between genes. The turquoise PKS gene and red gene of unknown function encoding a protein with a WD 40 repeat are shared among all four strains. For a complete list of protein annotations, see SI Appendix, Dataset S3. Figure was generated using Easyfig (58). A PKS gene cluster is conserved among four strains of anaerobic gut fungi. Regions 50 bp and larger of at least 35% identity are highlighted in gray between genes. The turquoise PKS gene and red gene of unknown function encoding a protein with a WD 40 repeat are shared among all four strains. For a complete list of protein annotations, see SI Appendix, Dataset S3. Figure was generated using Easyfig (58). Transcriptomics, Proteomics, and N6-Methylation Indicate that Many of the Biosynthetic Genes of Anaerobic Gut Fungi Are Active during Standard Laboratory Cultivation. Following the establishment of the presence of biosynthetic genes in gut fungal genomes, we probed what proportion of these genes were expressed. We demonstrate here through a combination of transcriptomics, epigenetics, and proteomics that anaerobic gut fungi transcribe and translate a substantial portion of their core biosynthetic genes. Out of 131 total biosynthetic genes of three or more catalytic domains (e.g., adenylation) across all four fungal strains, 34 are actively transcribed at midlog phase during the standard laboratory growth conditions described previously (13, 57), whereas the remainder are silent (Fig. 5). The proportion of transcribed genes varied between 22 and 31% across all four strains of anaerobic gut fungi. Using five different media formulations with varied nutrient complexity and availability (SI Appendix, Table S4), 13 of the backbone genes of N. californiae were differentially regulated (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). The presence of messenger RNA (mRNA) and its regulation are promising indicators that some secondary metabolite genes are active even when anaerobic gut fungi are cultivated outside of their native environment. These results also support the recent finding by Amos and colleagues (59) that many biosynthetic genes are actively transcribed during midlog phase, not only during stationary phase. However, it is possible that more genes are expressed during late stationary phase, but this was not tested by transcriptomics due to prevalence of highly degraded mRNA from cultures harvested at that phase. Fig. 5.Many core biosynthetic genes of anaerobic gut fungi are transcribed during standard laboratory cultivation. Transcriptomes were previously acquired from anaerobic fungi cultivated on both grasses and soluble sugars (13, 57). The number of biosynthetic genes represented in the transcriptome is indicated by the gray bars, and the number of genes absent from the transcriptome (silent) are represented by empty bars. The percentage of transcribed genes is presented by the black triangles (secondary axis). Many core biosynthetic genes of anaerobic gut fungi are transcribed during standard laboratory cultivation. Transcriptomes were previously acquired from anaerobic fungi cultivated on both grasses and soluble sugars (13, 57). The number of biosynthetic genes represented in the transcriptome is indicated by the gray bars, and the number of genes absent from the transcriptome (silent) are represented by empty bars. The percentage of transcribed genes is presented by the black triangles (secondary axis). Another indicator of active genes in early-diverging fungi is the presence of adenine N6-methylation marks on the promoter regions (60). Dense methylated adenine clusters (MACs) were observed within 500 bp of the transcription start site of 6 out of 13 core biosynthetic genes for P. finnis, 8 out of 14 for C. churrovis, and 3 out of 46 core genes for A. robustus (SI Appendix, Dataset S8). In addition, neighboring genes in the gene clusters were also marked by MACs: 34 neighboring genes in A. robustus clusters, 33 in P. finnis clusters, and 43 in C. churrovis clusters. The Type 1 PKS genes identified by antiSMASH were highly methylated: five out of seven PKS genes from P. finnis and five out of six from C. churrovis. These data corroborate the transcriptomic evidence that anaerobic gut fungi actively transcribe a significant portion of their backbone genes and associated gene clusters during standard laboratory cultivation. Finally, we searched for detectable proteins in both the membrane-bound and cytosolic fractions of fungal intracellular proteins. Proteomics confirmed that that at least 30% of the total biosynthetic enzymes from all four strains are translated into protein (SI Appendix, Table S5), thus increasing the likelihood that the secondary metabolism of anaerobic gut fungi is functionally active during laboratory cultivation. Notably, all copies of PKSs belonging to family 1 were expressed (SI Appendix, Table S5). In addition, PKS families 4 and 6, which were represented in the genomes of C. churrovis, N. californiae, and P. finnis were also expressed in these three strains. Across all lines of evidence (transcriptomics, N6-methylation, and proteomics), 53% of core biosynthetic genes were active by at least one metric. Three Groups of Natural Products from A. robustus and N. californiae Are Visualized via Molecular Networking of Tandem Mass Spectrometry Spectra. To further validate that anaerobic gut fungi synthesize natural products, we analyzed the nonpolar metabolites of A. robustus, C. churrovis, N. californiae, and P. finnis by liquid chromatography (LC)–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We first built molecular networks using the Global Natural Products Social Molecular Networking (GNPS) platform (61) to distinguish groups of natural products based on LC-MS/MS datasets collected for A. robustus and N. californiae. To discriminate between compounds secreted by A. robustus or N. californiae and compounds already present in the complex growth medium or released from autoclaving the reed canary grass growth substrate, we constructed a molecular network showing separate conditions for secreted nonpolar metabolites from A. robustus or N. californiae and compounds from a control of complex growth medium. The majority of nodes in three clusters of the network (Fig. 6) were only present in the anaerobic fungal strains. None of the nodes matched the spectral libraries in GNPS. Similarly, we constructed a molecular network of the nonpolar metabolites of C. churrovis and P. finnis (SI Appendix, Datasets S9 and S10) and observed a cluster of 12 nodes present in the fungal supernatant but absent from the control and spectral libraries in GNPS. These findings support the hypothesis that the anaerobic gut fungi produce strain-specific as well as conserved secondary metabolites. Since the cultivation of anaerobic fungi requires the use of complex medium that contains a small amount of clarified rumen fluid, which is expected to harbor a low concentration of background secondary metabolites secreted by native microbes, there may be additional natural products that are present in both fungal supernatant and the growth medium. Fig. 6.The molecular network generated from nonpolar untargeted metabolomics of A. robustus and N. californiae illustrates chemically diverse metabolites and natural products. Red rectangles enclose putative natural product clusters (A, B, and C) and baumin (D). Clusters A, B, and C are magnified below the network, and the chemical structure of baumin is shown in D. Node colors are as follows: blue = feature detected in N. californiae supernatant only, pink = A. robustus supernatant only, lilac = A. robustus and N. californiae, green = control only (autoclaved and incubated grass in liquid growth medium), gray = fungal supernatant and control. Self-looping nodes were truncated below baumin. The molecular network generated from nonpolar untargeted metabolomics of A. robustus and N. californiae illustrates chemically diverse metabolites and natural products. Red rectangles enclose putative natural product clusters (A, B, and C) and baumin (D). Clusters A, B, and C are magnified below the network, and the chemical structure of baumin is shown in D. Node colors are as follows: blue = feature detected in N. californiae supernatant only, pink = A. robustus supernatant only, lilac = A. robustus and N. californiae, green = control only (autoclaved and incubated grass in liquid growth medium), gray = fungal supernatant and control. Self-looping nodes were truncated below baumin. Anaerobic Gut Fungi Produce a Polyketide Related to the Antioxidant Baumin. Among the 72 compounds detected from A. robustus (SI Appendix, Dataset S11), one had fragmentation spectra and exact mass consistent with the styrylpyrone baumin (SI Appendix, Dataset S12). Styrylpyrones are found in mushrooms, especially medicinal mushrooms, and are thought to have roles similar to those of flavonoids in plants, such as antioxidants. Baumin itself was first detected as a product of the fungus Phellimus baumii (now renamed Sanghuangporus baumii) from the distantly related fungal phylum Basidiomycota (62, 63). This compound, putatively identified as baumin, was also produced by C. churrovis, N. californiae, and P. finnis. In all strains, it was observed at 10-fold or greater intensity in the supernatant of fungal cultures compared to the growth medium (SI Appendix, Dataset S13). We also used SIRIUS 4.0 (64) and CANOPUS (65) to predict the structure and class of the observed compound. Rather than baumin, SIRIUS predicted a flavonoid, whereas CANOPUS predicted a hydroxyflavonoid. However, upon inspection of the metabolic pathways annotated in the MycoCosm portal for A.
robustus, we found that A. robustus lacked any genes encoding the biosynthetic enzymes of flavonoids. Furthermore, sequence alignment of flavonoid biosynthetic enzymes in higher-order fungi to the predicted proteins from A. robustus identified no homologs. Therefore, baumin remained the top candidate for the unknown compound. The putative baumin is a secondary metabolite directly detected from anaerobic gut fungi, and it may serve the anaerobic gut fungi as an oxygen scavenger in the rumen of the host animal after forage intake. Hobson reported up to 0.6% oxygen transiently present in the gaseous phase of the rumen (11, 66). The gene cluster responsible for the production of baumin in S. baumii is not known at this time, which limited our ability to assign the gene cluster in anaerobic gut fungi. AntiSMASH predicted only one PKS gene cluster (accession OCB83923.1) with more than two domains from the S. baumii genome. The core biosynthetic gene was a hybrid NRPS-Type I PKS with PKS architecture of KS-AT-DH-KR-ACP (ketosynthase-acyltransferase-dehydratase-ketoreductase-acyl carrier protein). The domain architecture of this PKS is similar to PKS family 4 of the anaerobic fungi, although some members of this family lack the dehydratase domain (PKS genes from A. robustus scaffold 127, C. churrovis scaffold 129, and N. californiae scaffold 428). Protein BLAST results of the S. baumii PKS gene against the genes from PKS family 4 (SI Appendix, Table S3) are presented in SI Appendix, Datasets S14–S18. However, sequence similarity is only ∼30% between members of PKS family 4 from anaerobic fungi and the S. baumii PKS. Three additional PKS gene products (OCB90292.1, OCB89330.1, and OCB83944.1) were detected by a protein BLAST of the ketosynthase domain from OCB83923.1 against the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) nonredundant protein sequences database filtered by S. baumii. Using BLAST+ (41) in the MycoCosm portal (26), we queried the four PKS gene products from S. baumii against the filtered model proteins of each anaerobic gut fungus (SI Appendix, Table S6). Sequence alignments of OCB83923.1 resulted in the best combination of percent identity and subject coverage (>30% for both), but the corresponding subjects from each anaerobic gut fungus belonged to both PKS families 3 and 4. Based on these results, it remains unclear which gene cluster is responsible for baumin synthesis, and experimental validation is still necessary for both anaerobic gut fungi and S. baumii.