4. Discussion The regulatory capabilities of small RNAs have only been appreciated for the last 20 years or so. This lack of awareness is exemplified in work by Nishiyama et al. [31], where the authors created a Streptomyces azureus strain that overexpressed the BalA1 region of the chromosome (a 2.5-kb chromosomal DNA fragment). The resulting BalA1 strain formed little aerial hyphae and exhibited a capacity to overproduce secondary metabolites. The authors focused on the fact that the equivalent chromosomal region in the S. coelicolor genome contains two protein-coding genes: SCO3557 and SCO3558. They referred to SCO3558 as encoding a “morphological differentiation-associated protein”. Subsequent work [14,24,32] has revealed, however, that the SCO3558 gene is flanked by two sRNA-coding genes scr3558 (encoding 6C RNA) [24,33] and by the scr3559 (investigated here) (Figure 1). Expression of both scr3558 and scr3559 RNAs has been verified. Mutagenesis of the scr3558 gene had no effect on cell physiology (personal communication [34]), whereas deletion [16] and/or overproduction of the scr3559 RNA (our C6S strain) led to changes in morphological development and secondary metabolite production. The phenotypes in this study are reminiscent of those described for the S. azureus BalA1 strain, where the scr3559-equivalent RNA could be responsible for the observed change in cell physiology following overexpression of the sRNA region. One may speculate that the BalA1 phenotype could be caused by increased expression of other gene product(s) from the BalA1 locus, including SCO3558 or SCO3559. The SCO3558 gene is a possible paralogue of the mmfP gene, which is located in a cluster of genes encoding enzymes responsible for the synthesis of the methylenomycin furans (MMFs) from the SCP1 plasmid of S. coelicolor [35]. These MMFs are freely diffusible signaling molecules that control the expression of the plasmid-encoded antibiotic methylenomycin. Nishiyama et al. also demonstrated that the S. azureus BalA1 strain induced its neighboring S. coelicolor A3(2) to produce the red antibiotic undecylprodigiosin early on in its life cycle. We therefore speculated that the scr3559 RNA in S. coelicolor may also contribute to the control of signaling molecule(s). However, we did not see any influence of the C6S strain on the development of the neighboring C0 strain, as was observed in the BalA1 strain. It is not yet clear whether either of the flanking protein-coding genes (SCO3558 and SCO3559), contribute to Streptomyces development, as their expression decreased in the C6S strain according to our microarray data. The results presented here indicate that sRNAs contribute to the control of antibiotic production in Streptomyces species. Several pioneering studies on specific small RNAs expressed in Streptomyces have been published [36,37,38]. Subsequent bioinformatic approaches have predicted that tens of sRNA transcripts might be expressed during the developmental cycle of S. coelicolor [14,24,25,32,39,40]. The scr3559 RNA, whose pleiotropic phenotypic effects are described here, was first detected by Panek [14]. Further study revealed that the transcript’s secondary structure is reminiscent of the well-characterized 6S RNA [15]. Binding assays confirmed that scr3559 can form a complex with RNAP-HrdB and an analysis of its secondary structure validated these earlier predictions [16]. As we found here, two forms of scr3559 RNA are produced: a longer 260 nt-long molecule referred to here as pre-scr3559, and a shorter 192 nt-long “processed” form. 6S RNA processing has been studied in E. coli and other proteobacteria, where two precursor transcripts (transcribed from different promoters) are processed to give a mature 183 nt 6S RNA [41]. RNase E and its paralogue RNase G are required for this processing [41]. A similar situation has been noted in Bacillus thuringiensis, where two genes, ssrSA and ssrSB, are co-transcribed and processed by ribonucleases to give a functional 6S RNA [42]. It would be expected that equivalent RNases may contribute to the processing of the 6S RNA in S. coelicolor (Figure 2b); however, this has not yet been explored experimentally. It is also not known whether both precursor and processed-6S RNAs are functional, or whether functionality is confined to the processed form. Interestingly, a deep sequencing analysis of S. coelicolor transcriptome detected a transcript antisense to the scr3559 RNA which is also expressed in the early stationary phase of cell development [32]. We believe that this could be a transcript equivalent to Ms1 RNA found in Mycobacterium smegmatis where it is positioned in the same antisense orientation [15,43]. Ms1 RNA accumulates in stationary phase and forms a 6S-like secondary structure [44]. Therefore, Ms1 RNA has been proposed to be the mycobacterial 6S RNA. It was however later demonstrated that Ms1 does not bind to the primary σ70-factor-RNAP complex, and instead forms a complex with the RNAP core that is devoid of the sigma factor [44]. This promotes increased sigma-free core RNA polymerase levels, leading to a reservoir of RNAP in stationary phase [45]. Further research is needed in order to elucidate the roles of both the 6S-like scr3559 RNA and its antisense Ms1-like transcript. 6S RNA levels are at their maximum during stationary phase in many bacteria [46]. In E. coli, 6S RNA levels increase up to 11 times in stationary phase compared to exponential phase [47], and the transcript effectively sequesters the majority of σ70 and upregulates σS synthesis [46,48,49]. This promotes optimal cell survival, promoting sigma factor switching by the transcriptional machinery and leading to different transcriptional outcomes. This allows the bacteria to better adapt to and survive various stress conditions including nutrient limitation, and prolongs cell viability when compared with 6S RNA-deficient strains [46]. Bacillus subtilis is slightly more complex, as it expresses two 6S RNAs: 6S-1 RNA and 6S-2 RNA. Whereas 6S-1 RNA exhibits a similar expression profile to the E. coli 6S RNA, 6S-2 RNA’s expression is steady throughout the cell cycle [13,50,51,52]. Interestingly, 6S-1 RNA impacts the timing of sporulation [53]. A strain of B. thuringiensis lacking 6S-1 RNA also exhibited a reduced capacity to survive stationary phase and was defective in spore formation [42]. 6S RNA has also been observed to mediate transition into a dormant state in Coxiella burnetii, an obligate intracellular pathogen. The cellular level of 6S RNA in this bacterium peaks after developmental differentiation into a spore-like small cell variant [54]. These findings are all consistent with our observations in Streptomyces. As we have shown, scr3559 RNA levels increase during the transition into stationary phase, and culminate with onset of antibiotic production. When scr3559 expression was induced by thiostrepton, the C6S strain was observed to promote rapid entry into stationary phase. On solid media, this resulted in the formation of very small, precociously sporulating colonies (Figure 5). These observations correlated with our microarray analyses, where we observed increased transcript levels for genes whose products drive aerial hyphae development, septation and sporulation in the C6S strain. Although some streptomycete strains, like S. coelicolor, do not develop aerial mycelium and spores in liquid media, transcriptomic data suggest that gene expression in liquid and solid cultures are comparable [55]. A comparative transcriptomic study revealed that 86% of genes are expressed at the same level in both liquid and solid media, including genes involved in sporulation (bldN, sapA, and whiG, among others) [55]. The alternative BldN-sigma factor of RNAP is required for aerial mycelium formation and subsequent sporulation [56]. As our microarray data show, transcript levels of this developmental regulator in the C6S strain exhibited an almost four-fold increase in younger cells (72 h) and an approximate two and a half fold increase in older cultures (144 h) compared with the control strain C0. Early stages of sporulation are regulated by WhiG, another alternative sigma factor of RNAP [57]. Its regulon members include whiH, which encodes a sporulation transcription factor [58,59,60]. WhiH is required for the process of aerial hyphae septation; only a few sporulation septa are formed in loosely coiled aerial hyphae when this GntR-family transcription factor is missing [58]. whiH also activates the expression of geoA, a gene encoding an enzyme responsible for the synthesis of the earthy volatile compound geosmin [61]. The expression of whiH and whiG genes was doubled and tripled, respectively, in the older C6S strain. Also upregulated in C6S was the expression of the spore-associated protein SapA-encoding gene, whose synthesis is also connected with the aerial hyphae development [62,63]. Morphological development during stationary phase is accompanied by increased secondary metabolism; this was even more active when high levels of scr3559 RNA were produced. One explanation for this could be through elevated levels of the γ-butyrolactone bacterial hormones. These molecules are responsible for cell signaling, coordinating morphological changes, and triggering the onset of secondary metabolism during stationary phase [64,65]. The synthesis of the S. coelicolor butanolide (SCB; an equivalent molecule to A-factor in S. griseus) is directed by the γ-butyrolactone synthase ScbA [66]. SCB is sensed by the receptor protein ScbR, whose repression of biosynthetic gene clusters is then relieved. Our microarray data show that in the young C6S strain, expression of scbA is upregulated, while expression of scbR is reduced. Two other genetic loci, whose expression is known to activate antibiotic production in S. coelicolor (the Abe cluster [67] and AbsR [68]), were also upregulated in the younger C6S strain. These activation events may contribute to the increased production of antibiotics. Other than actinorhodin, the C6S strain produced the undecylprodigiosin (red) antibiotic earlier in its life cycle and in higher concentrations than the control C0 strain. Prodiginines are membrane damaging molecules that are produced inside the substrate mycelia cells in nutrient-deficient conditions. Lacking any self-resistance gene, they may contribute to a programmed cell death process that supports aerial hyphae development [69]. The “red” biosynthetic pathway is activated by the RedD regulator, whose gene expression is upregulated (doubled to tripled) during the development of the C6S strain. This occurs in concert with reduced growth of vegetative hyphae of the C6S strain observed here (Figure 5). Other upregulated secondary metabolite gene clusters in the C6S strain include crtEIBV and crtYTU (in older cells), which are associated with the carotenoid isorenieratene synthesis pathway [70] and the Gcs type III polyketide (germicidins) [71], respectively. The expression of the Gcs gene SCO7221 was tripled in older C6S cells, in accordance with the elevated germicidin levels observed in our LC-MS analysis (Figure 7). Germicidin A inhibits not only spore germination, but also vegetative hyphae elongation [72]. Thus, the germicidins may therefore contribute—possibly in association with the prodiginines—to the sporulation process supported by the scr3559 RNA.