3. Discussion In the current work we aimed to address certain unclear issues about van genes, such as their distribution and phylogeny. Although we are aware that our results might risk generating more questions than answers, we tried in the following section to summarize what are, in our opinion, the most relevant findings. Actinobacteria are the most likely primary sources of vlgs. First of all, the results of our screens, covering more than 7000 actinobacterial genomes and 2000 Bacillales genomes, revealed that vlgs are abundant within the Actinobacteria phylum (with an incidence of ca. 13%), while vanishingly rare in bacilli and related species belonging to the Firmicutes phylum. This disproves the idea of van-like genes and operons emerging independently in soil-dwelling actinobacteria and bacilli [28]. Abundance and context variability of actinobacterial vlgs point to the Actinobacteria phylum as to the original source of van genes. At the same time, the assumption that ubiquitous low G-C soil Gram-positives served as a bridge for vlgs to arrive in pathogens [28] seems likely. Such a transfer was probably achieved via MGEs, which often were proved to carry vlgs in low G-C soil Gram-positives and pathogens [52]. In fact, we found the classical Tn1549 transposon in the actinobacterium Atp. minutum 10063974, even though until now Tn1549-like transposons were described only in enterococci [53]. It is hard to say whether Atp. minutum 10063974 might represent the original actinobacterial source of Tn1549, or if this is an example of reverse HGT event: G-C content (estimated from vanRSYWHAX genes) of Atp. minutum 10063974 Tn1549 is the same as in Enterococcus faecalis BM4382 Tn1549—47%. However, this is comparable to the overall genome G-C content of Atp. minutum 10063974, which is ca. 48%. At the same time, two novel, putative MGEs (very similar to each other) were also found in the genomes of the actinobacteria Er. mucosicola NM66_B29 and Pvb. caecicola DSM 22242. These MGEs coded unusual transposases, carrying vlgs coding proteins that in our phylogenetic reconstructions did not cluster with Van proteins derived from low G-C Gram-positives. Once again, it is not clear if these MGEs might represent the ‘original’ actinobacterial vlg-carrying elements. The G-C content of MGEs from Er. mucosicola NM66_B29 and Pvb. caecicola DSM 22242 (as estimated from the G-C content of their vanRSHAXY-D-genes) is ca. 55%. This is higher than the usual G-C content of MGEs from low G-C Gram-positives, but lower than the overall genome G-C content of Er. mucosicola NM66_B29 and Pvb. caecicola DSM 22242 (64.6% and 62.4%, respectively). Thus, the study of vlgs in the soil mobilome requires more detailed and focused research, which could in future contribute to a better understanding of how vlgs were disseminated from actinobacteria. vlgs are distributed in actinobacteria without any evident strict correlation to GPA BGCs distribution, although a complex co-evolution with BGCs likely occurred. Our comparative genomic analysis of the different orders belonging to the Actinobacteria phylum showed that vlgs are not necessarily co-localized with Type I–IV GPA BGCs; moreover, in the majority of the cases, vlgs were found in GPA non-producers as well as in Type V GPA producers. Consequently, it is reasonable to assume that non-cluster-situated vlgs existed independently from GPA BGCs and might actually be considered a preadaptation feature, which then facilitated the spread of GPA BGCs within the Actinobacteria phylum. Next, GPA cluster-situated vlgs are not monophyletic, meaning that different GPA BGCs likely acquired these genes from different sources of the vast actinobacterial pool. All our phylogenetic reconstructions in fact showed that cluster-situated vlgs emerged randomly on the trees, surrounded by non-cluster-situated vlgs. One of the most prominent lines of evidence came from the VanY phylogeny, where Nonomuraea spp. and Amycolatopsis spp. GPA cluster-encoded VanY carboxypeptidases belonged to distant clusters (Y2 and Y5, Figure 9), separated by multiple other non-cluster-encoded VanY proteins. Moreover, vlgs and GPA BGCs seem to have a shared, complex co-evolution pattern. We were able to reconstruct one of the most obvious ones, observed for the self-resistance phenotype in the A40926 producer N. gerenzanensis, which relied on the expression of the cluster-situated vanY-like gene—dbv7. In the corresponding dbv7 knockout mutant, GPA resistance was significantly reduced, but not completely abolished [62]. Screening the full genome of N. gerenzanensis [67], the reason became evident: an additional vanY allele was found far away the dbv BGC. Interestingly, this allele was co-localized with a vanRS-like regulatory pair, whereas dbv7 was not. The same situation was observed for N. coxensis DSM 45129—a recently described producer of A40926-like Type IV GPA [40,68]: a cluster-situated dbv7 homologue (almost identical) and a non-cluster-situated vanRSY-triad were identified in its genome. The two other screened genomes of Nonomuraea spp.—the GPA non-producing N. fuscirosea CGMCC 4.7104 and the kistamicin producer Nonomuraea sp. ATCC 55076—contained close homologues of the vanRSY-triad. In addition, the genome of the other putative GPA producer Nonomuraea sp. WAC 01424 presented the GPA BGC just upstream the vanRSY-triad, while no vanY-allele was found in the BGC itself. Finally, in our reconstructed phylogeny of VanY-like carboxypeptidases, the dbv and noc cluster-encoded VanY-proteins out-grouped (Y1 cluster) all other ones (Figure 10). We believe that such a picture is as a result of a series of HGT events. In our hypothesis, summarized in Figure 12, first, noc and dbv protoclusters recruited the vanY gene from the vanRSY triad present in the common ancestor of Nonomuraea spp., whereas the WAC 01424 and kistamycin ancestral BGCs did not acquire it. Then, noc and dbv, through another HGT event, were introduced in the Nonomuraea ancestors already carrying the vanRSY triad. Another HGT event delivered WAC 01424 BGC to Nonomuraea sp. WAC 01424 and kistamycin BGC to Nonomuraea sp. ATCC 55076, explaining why the vanRSY triad is the only resistance determinant in these strains. Finally, no such HGT event occurred in N. fuscirosea CGMCC 4.7104, leaving this strain without any GPA BGCs but still carrying the vanRSY triad. Is the GPA resistance the original function of vlgs? As reported above, actinobacteria are an extremely abundant source of vlgs. It is quite difficult to consider that such a variety of vlgs in GPA non-producing actinobacteria is needed to protect them versus the GPA producers, which definitively seemed quite rare. Alternatively, vlgs might have natural functions in cell-wall remodeling in response to environmental and/or developmental triggers. For instance, VanY-like M15B carboxypeptidases are extremely abundant in actinobacteria, forming diverged evolutionary lineages; it is tempting to suspect their role in, for instance, cell-wall remodeling during the life cycle (a function indeed shown for some other d-Ala-d-Ala carboxypeptidase [69]). Our finding of the so-called pdx operon, common for Micromonosporales, contributed to such an idea. This putative operon is composed of a PALP-like serine-threonine dehydratase, a Ddl ligase and a VanX-like dipeptidase genes, co-localized with a vanRS-like regulatory pair. This organization suggests an alternative mechanism of peptidoglycan precursor remodeling, which reminds the introduction of d-Ala-d-Ser termini in the cell wall of some enterococci, showing a low level of GPA resistance [14]. It is unknown whether the pdx operon is functional and if its expression leads to some cell wall remodeling, but such a case indeed merits further experimental evaluation. To conclude, we must say that the current work only scratched the surface of actinobacterial vlgs, leaving many issues without a complete final evaluation and understanding. However, we hope that this should provoke other in silico, in vitro and in vivo studies, which will shed light on such an important question such as GPA resistance. Our findings portray actinobacteria as a Pandora’s box, hosting myriads of putative GPA resistance genes that might be transferred sooner or later to pathogens, significantly contributing to AMR. A thorough understanding of GPA resistance in actinobacteria may prove useful in the future surveillance of emerging mechanisms of resistance to clinically used GPAs. Although further experiments are necessary to show that the discovered in silico putative vlgs have a real function in vivo conferring GPA resistance, their study may reveal new insights into their biological functions in actinobacteria, augmenting our comprehension of this remarkable phylum.