Discussion The competition-relatedness hypothesis proposed by Charles R. Darwin in the Origin of Species, that is, congeneric species are likely to compete more fiercely by means of their functional similarity33, has been examined in various organisms and has received both positive and negative support34–37. With regard to the microbial fierce competition exemplified by antagonism, Russel et al. found a negative correlation between inhibition probability and phylogenetic distance9; some other scientists discovered a positive relationship between antagonistic interaction (including kin discrimination) and phylogenetic dissimilarity in genus Vibrio7 and Streptomyces10,11, and species B. subtilis12,13. The present study demonstrated that antagonism tended to be positively correlated with phylogenetic distance within the genus Bacillus (Figs. 3 and 4). Comprehensively, we pronounce that within a relatively narrow phylogenetic range such as for congeneric strains, BGC similarity, which determines the secondary metabolite profile, appears to be the main driver of antagonistic interactions (Figs. 2–5). BGCs themselves, or other elements in the same genome, usually encode antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) to afford self-resistance by providing active efflux or modification of the relevant metabolite29,38, while the absence of a specific BGC suggests the potential to be sensitive to this compound17,18; this principle was also confirmed by the observation that antagonism was dependent on the BGC that was present in the antagonistic strain but absent in the target strain (Fig. 5). In addition, despite the mobility of BGCs among different microbes16,39 as indicated by the prevalence of a number of homologous clusters in genomes from phylogenetically distant species (Supplementary Fig. 9), their distribution pattern was generally in accordance with the phylogenetic relationship within genus (Fig. 2b, c). Consequently, closely related species with a higher BGC similarity have a lower probability of inhibiting each other, while distant species in the same genus are likely to suppress each other more fiercely (Figs. 3 and 4). Therefore, we highlighted that the coherence between BGCs distribution and phylogenetic characteristics is one of the crucial factors regulating congeneric interactions. Comparatively, at a larger taxonomic scale, the significant variation in the BGCs distribution among bacteria from different genera or even phyla can contribute to an irregular correlation between the secondary metabolite profile and phylogenetic distance28,40,41. In this situation, functional similarity, such as metabolic niche overlap, may become the main driver and lead to a negative correlation between antagonism and phylogenetic distance9. Taken together, this taxonomic range-dependent association between antagonism and phylogeny should indicate a cooperation-competition tradeoff during microbial interactions and is coordinated by a set of sophisticated molecular mechanisms. Interestingly, the positive correlation between antagonism and phylogeny was relatively strong in antagonistic strains possessing abundant BGCs (e.g., >10), but was weak or even not significant in those harboring fewer BGCs (e.g., <8) (Fig. 4d). This divergence is likely to arise from the altered antagonism-BGC distance correlation in different bacteria (Fig. 4e and Supplementary Fig. 8). As inhibition is mainly dependent on specific BGCs that are present in antagonistic strain and absent in target strain (Fig. 5), we further identified the unique BGCs in each antagonistic strain for confronting different targets (Supplementary Data 8). It has been shown that for bacteria possessing fewer BGCs (e.g., B. aquimaris XL39 and B. horikoshii ACCC02299), the low number of the unique antibiotics (usually ≤3, excluding those without antimicrobial activity, e.g., oligosaccharide and phosphonate), was not appropriate for statistical analysis and can impair the biological regularity of inhibition phenotype against diverse targets (Supplementary Data 8). This attribution can partially explain the weak correlation between antagonism and phylogeny in these strains. Furthermore, other potential factors may also contribute to the relatively low correlation between antagonism and phylogeny, for example, the unknown secondary metabolites of bacteriocins may specifically kill close relatives, internal genetic variation (e.g., point mutations, partial deletion, altered gene regulation, and silent expression) or external cues (e.g., environmental factors and competing strains) can affect the antibiotic production11,17,42,43, and the undiscovered genetic and physiological features may also regulate the response to different predicted BGCs. It would be important to identify more secondary metabolites responsible for bacterial interference competition and to further investigate the exquisite regulation characteristics of these functional molecules. Noticeably, there are some differences between our finding and that reported by Lyons & Kolter, who demonstrated a negative correlation between kin discrimination and phylogeny14. This discrepancy may be attributed to the following reasons: (i) The antagonism in this research were evaluated by colony confrontation and fermentation supernatant inhibition, which was dominated by diffusible secondary antibiotics within a comparatively longer distance; while the kin discrimination in Lyons & Kolter’s study was assessed based on swarm interaction, biofilm meeting, and halo formation14, which was likely to be dependent on closer cell association (e.g., toxin-antitoxin system and cell-surface contact)13. (ii) The antagonism-phylogeny correlation in our study was calculated based on interactions between diverse antagonistic and target strains. Comparatively, the halo assay performed previously examined the inhibition of one indicated species (B. subtilis NCIB3610) by different testing strains14; as discussed above, the different BGCs distribution patterns (e.g., the quantity) among distinct antagonistic strains can influence the inhibition phenotype and its relationship with phylogenetic distance. In general, we consider that Lyons & Kolter’s study has provided important knowledge with regard to kin discrimination and close contact, especially in a mixed bacterial population14; and our study focused more on the antagonistic interaction sensu lato, which can occur within a long distance. Bacilli possess an amazing capacity to synthesize a diverse range of secondary metabolites; previous studies have indicated the phylogenetic conservation of BGCs in the genus Bacillus and identified multiple species/clade-specific molecules16,17,44. Based on bioinformatics analysis of genomes from a larger scale, we also demonstrated the phylogenetic dependence of BGCs distribution pattern in the genus Bacillus (Fig. 2b, c). Specifically, the subtilis clade appeared to be the most abundant arsenal for secondary metabolites16, where the 1259 genomes possessed 16,502 BGCs belonging to 117 products, 310 GCFs, and 47 GCCs, including numerous distinctive and powerful products such as difficidin and macrolactin that produced by B. amyloliquefaciens and B. velezensis, lichenicidin produced by B. licheniformis, and so on (Supplementary Data 4). On the other hand, the BGC-phylogeny regression suggested that the variation of secondary metabolites among intra- or closely related species was slight and stable, but can be either moderate or drastic among distant groups (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Fig. 5). This finding coincides with the transferability of BGCs among different genomes and acquisition through horizontal gene transfer (HGT)16,39 (Supplementary Fig. 9); therefore, the correlation (R2 = 0.2847, Fig. 2c) is relatively lower as compared with other conserved genes (e.g., housekeeping genes or metabolism relevant characteristics)45. The cooperation-competition tradeoff among microbial interactions is usually the consequence of the balance between benefits, such as public goods sharing and cross-feeding, and costs, such as resource competition and stress resistance2,14. Within a narrow phylogenetic range (e.g., congeneric interactions), only closely associated species can share secreted cooperative goods, such as surfactin for swarming and biofilm formation14 or siderophores for iron acquisition46,47, while metabolic similarity decreases moderately or even changes irregularly with phylogenetic distance9,11. Consequently, closely related species can enjoy a higher benefit of public goods than the cost of resource competition and therefore exhibit a relatively weak antagonistic tendency, while distantly related species can hardly share public goods but still confront nutrient competition; thus, the relatively lower benefit than cost contributes to strong demand for congeneric inhibition. Over a broad phylogenetic range (e.g., intraphylum interactions), all strains can barely exploit mutually cooperative goods; hence, their benefit-cost balance is predominantly driven by the cost of nutrient competition9. As a result, metabolic similarity facilitates the negative correlation between antagonism and phylogenetic distance. This dualistic relationship between interference competition and phylogenetic distance could be a consequence of natural selection, which impels microbes to balance cooperation and competition in an economical manner and plays an important role in regulating community assemblage and succession48. In conclusion, the present study demonstrates the consistency between the BGCs distribution and phylogenetic tendency within the genus Bacillus, and this coherence acts as the main factor driving the positive correlation between congeneric antagonism and phylogenetic distance, especially in strains possessing abundant BGCs. We expect this positive association between congeneric antagonism and phylogeny is either pronounced10,11 or can be predicted in other genera with abundant BGCs. This study deepens our understanding of the driving forces and intrinsic mechanism of microbial interactions and provides implications for designing synthetic microbial communities and manipulating population assemblages for practical purpose.