Discussion Microbial pigments are receiving more attention in current research as they are widely applied as natural food colourants, fires, antimicrobial agents and cytotoxic activity (Ramesh et al., 2019). Yellow Txn exhibits antibiotic activity against a variety of bacteria, fungi and plants and has mammalian toxicity (Latuasan and Berends, 1961; Cox et al., 2000). This toxin is well known as a key virulence factor for bacterial grain rot of rice and wilt of many crop plants (Jeong et al., 2003; Kim et al., 2004). The phytotoxicity of Txn was effective against a broad range of monocot and dicot plants (Koh et al., 2011). Furthermore, Txn has also been shown to demonstrate anticancer activity (Choi et al., 2013a,2013b). These findings led us to investigate the biodegradation and utilization of Txn. In this study, we isolated two bacteria, S. adhaesiva SG14 and Agrobacterium sp. AL14, with Txn‐degrading activity from healthy rice seeds. Surprisingly, even though the two bacteria belong to distinctly different genera, they shared identical nucleotide regions (stdR and stdA) that function in toxoflavin degradation. In this study, we confirmed that the stdAR genes can be transferred by conjugation. These results support the possibility that these bacteria have acquired and shared genes important in antibiotic‐Txn degradation through horizontal gene transfer to allow for survival in the same ecological niche. The Txn produced by B. glumae, causing rice grain rot, has antibacterial‐antifungal activity, so it is difficult for other microorganisms to survive when B. glumae is present. We isolated two Txn‐degrading bacteria in this study, as well as P. polymyxa JH02 with Txn‐degrading TflA in a previous study from healthy rice seeds (Koh et al., 2011), and these results suggest that Txn‐resistant bacteria are probably well established in the rice grain environment. In order to complete gene horizontal movement, it is necessary to have components including transposable elements, but there is currently no information on whether the stdRA genes are present in these components. It could be interpreted as the result of a war between a rice parasite that use Txn as a weapon and saprophytes trying to overcome it. In addition, it is analysing the extent of matching around two matching genes. Achieved through horizontal gene transfer, the acquisition of antibiotic resistance is necessary for survival in the ecological niche of agricultural animals and humans frequently treated with antibiotics against many bacterial pathogens (O’Brien, 2002). Many variations among closely related bacterial genomes are due to gains and losses of genes that are acquired horizontally as well as to gene duplications and larger amplifications (Francino, 2012). Recently, many findings suggest that specific plasmid might be able to overcome horizontal transfer barriers including host range, phylogenetic and ecological habitat (Zrimec, 2020; Zurfluh et al., 2020). The majority of dioxygenases fully incorporated dioxygen into their substrates, and a variety of cofactor schemes are used to achieve this activity. The most widely observed cofactor involved in dioxygenase reactions is iron. The Txn‐degrading enzyme TflA and TxeA require the Mn(II) ion for Txn degradation (Koh et al., 2011; Choi et al., 2018). Metal ions were not required for the Txn‐degrading activity of StdA‐His, indicating that StdA has novelty that can be distinguished from many known members of the dioxygenase superfamily. Characterization of StdA mutations trough single amino acid substitutions and high‐resolution crystallographic analysis may be required to define the role of specific amino acid residues involved in metal ion independence and Txn binding. In this study, we found that the expression of stdA is regulated by StdR (LTTR family), in the presence of the coinducer, Txn (Fig. 4). These results revealed that the StdR and StdA system operates only in the presence of Txn, so the energy costs for bacteria are efficiently decreased for adaptation to competitive environments to allow for survival in this ecological niche. Because Txn degradation is an energetically expensive process in the absence of Txn, bacteria use complicated regulatory networks to conserve energy and to compete for appropriate niches for survival. There are many other examples of similar regulatory systems, allowing genes to be expressed only when they are needed to utilize or degrade exogenous compounds, such as the use of lactose. In addition, in S. coelicolor, the two components VanRS regulate the expression of vancomycin resistance genes only when vancomycin is present (Hutchings et al., 2006). In the case of flagella biosynthesis, flagellum genes of bacteria are most likely regulated on multiple levels to conserve energy and to promote the transition between different bacterial developmental phases (Macnab, 1996; Kim et al., 2007; Zan et al., 2015). Our StdRA regulation was unique compared with a previous report that tflA, which encodes a Txn‐degrading enzyme, existed independently without a regulator (Koh et al., 2011). It is interesting that StdA is specific for Txn and does not degrade the other derivatives except reumycin without a single methyl group. However, reumycin does not act as a StdR coinducer and consequently does not induce stdA expression in vivo. The interaction of StdR with the DNA region of the stdA promoter is central to the control of stdA transcription. Currently, we do not have direct evidence of the interaction between StdR and the stdA promoter DNA region. To perform electrophoretic mobility shift assays, the StdR was overexpressed in E. coli. Overexpressed StdR was collected in the pellet fraction. We used previously reported methods, such as temperature variation, IPTG concentration, incubation time, Txn induction, sorbitol supplement using betaine and the use of sarkosyl, to improve protein solubility, but StdR remained in the pellet fraction. The generation of transgenic plants with agriculturally improved features will improve agricultural production and economy. The selection of transgenic plants from wild types is crucial in the development of plant transformation methods. The current antibiotic and herbicide resistance selection systems have many issues, and their uses can be limited. Therefore, a more efficient and safe selection marker system is in high demand. Txn is a known photosensitizer and may be useful as a new selection agent for the generation of transgenic plants, as reported previously (Koh et al., 2011). To determine whether transgenic plants expressing stdA are resistant to Txn, we transformed stdA into rice. Through rice transformation, it was possible to ensure that StdA‐expressing rice plants degrade Txn to make it resistant to Txn. Engineering microbial agents for the biocontrol of plant diseases can provide new ways to use natural microorganisms as microbial inoculums, thereby can be used as an eco‐friendly alternative to pesticides (Jing et al., 2020). Inactivation of the negatively‐acting transcriptional regulator or sensor kinase enhanced the production of antimicrobial secondary metabolites, which contributed to improving the antimicrobial activity to act as a biocontrol agent (Kim et al., 2003; Jing et al., 2020). In this study, the biological control effect on rice grain rot using Txn‐degrading bacteria was not evaluated, so future studies on plant disease control incorporating microbial biotechnology are needed. In this study, we identified a novel phytotoxin‐quenching regulation of bacteria from rice grain, on which phytotoxin‐producers co‐exist. Our results demonstrate the possibility that if the population of phytotoxin‐quenchers were to overwhelm that of producers, the toxicity would be reduced. Manipulating the microbial ecosystem will be an alternative strategy for controlling plant disease. This is the first study to demonstrate that the LysR‐type regulator StdR and its coinducer Txn activate expression of the Txn‐degrading enzyme StdA. The characterization of StdA may enable the development of disease‐resistant crop plants.