4. Discussion The importance of gliotoxin for A. fumigatus virulence has been widely described [12,13,14,15,30,31,32,33]. However, the relevance of other toxins produced by A. fumigatus, such as fumagillin, has not been studied in depth. Fumagillin is a macrolide that targets methionine aminopeptidase 2 (MetAP2) by covalent binding to the His231, inhibiting the proper functioning of the protein. Recent publications have pointed out that fumagillin could induce lung epithelial cell damage, both acting alone [23] and in synergy with gliotoxin [34]. Moreover, this mycotoxin is able to inhibit cell proliferation and angiogenesis in endothelial cells [20]. However, little is known about its effect on the fungus or other cell types or its role in fungal virulence in vivo during the development of pulmonary aspergillosis. To study this, we used a deletion mutant strain of the fmaA gene and its complement strain where fmaA encodes a terpene cyclase required for fumagillin synthesis [22]. First, an UHPLC method for the detection of fumagillin in samples of RPMI obtained after in vitro assays was standardized. Using this method, we were able to detect as low as 0.1 µg/mL of fumagillin. Furthermore, we confirmed that the ∆fmaA strain was not able to secrete fumagillin, corroborating the previously published data [22]. Then, we performed a macroscopic phenotypical and growth study that showed that the mutant strain ∆fmaA did not present any difference compared to the Wt strain when they grew in the presence of structural, osmotic, and oxidative stresses (Figures S1 and S3). We also observed that A. fumigatus was not susceptible to exogenous fumagillin (Figure S2), but that fumagillin may be a germination-stimulating factor (Figure 1). These results could support our hypothesis that the gene Afu8g00410, encoding a methionine aminopeptidase located inside the fumagillin cluster, confers resistance to the fungus. This gene would be co-expressed with the rest of the cluster, providing a resistant MetAP2 to the fungus and may explain the results obtained in Figure 1. Continuing with fungal strains’ germination ability, it is notable that the ∆fmaA strain reached higher germination and branching rates than the other strains growing without cells and in the presence of fumagillin. The increased branching rates observed in the ∆fmaA strain may indicate that fumagillin could be involved in a polarization process, or in contrast, the increased branching observed could be a consequence of the adaptive process to the fumagillin presence. In any case, both hypotheses should be studied in depth. Analysis of the effect of synthetic fumagillin on both A549 pneumocytes and RAW 264.7 macrophages, which are common cell lines to perform toxin/molecule/drug response analysis [23,34,35], demonstrated that each cell type uptakes the mycotoxin in different ways (Figure 2). Fumagillin was clearly depleted from the supernatant (93.5%) of pneumocytes but to a much lesser degree (23.5%) macrophages culture. Furthermore, the lysis of both cell types using RIPA buffer and subsequent detection of the toxin by UHPLC suggested that the reduction in fumagillin from the media was due to its uptake by the cell. One explanation could be attributed to the different expression levels of the MetAP2 enzyme between both cell types (https://www.proteinatlas.org; accessed 15 August 2021). Moreover, we cannot forget that macrophages can express different efflux systems that could expel the toxin from the cytosol. Finally, we cannot totally discard that cells could also degrade fumagillin, but no peaks similar to the ones observed after the fumagillin degradation assays (light, temperature, and acid environment) were detected either in the supernatants or the pellets (Figure S2). Therefore, it seems that fumagillin could passively cross the cell membrane reaching the cell cytosol [36] and bind to MetAP2, thus leading to loss of the toxin in the supernatant. The MTT results shown in this study are in accordance with the ones previously published [34,37,38], but our interpretation of the MTT results varies with the other studies. In this study, we used the MTT assay as a technique suitable to measure the ETC [39], while other authors used it to measure cell viability. On the other hand, it is important to note that our highest fumagillin concentration used (2 µg/mL) was the lowest of all these above-cited studies. In contrast, it is important to note that during the infection process in vivo or during the contact between the fungus and host cells, the toxin concentration reached could be higher. For instance, the production of candidalys in by Candida albicans in the invasion pocket produced an extremely high concentration of the toxin at the contact site between the fungus and the cell [40]. This hypothesis could explain why a previous study performed with this same ∆fmaA strain demonstrated that it was less toxic than the Wt to the A549 cell line as assessed by 51Cr release assays [23]. Our results support the affectation of the ETC activity, as both the wound healing assay and the CFSE analysis performed by flow cytometry demonstrated that the proliferation of epithelial cells was affected after fumagillin exposure but not its cellular viability. Specifically, the covalent binding of fumagillin to its molecular target, MetAP2, results in an inhibition of all functions that MetAP2 orchestrates inside the cell [21]. They include the membrane signaling pathway involving proteins, such as Gi/o, Giβγ, PI3K, PLC, DAG, or IP3 that govern cell migration and proliferation [41,42,43]. The results obtained with the RAW 264.7 cells were slightly different from those obtained from the pneumocytes since although they suffered a drop in the ETC activity and a delay in the cell proliferation after exposure to fumagillin, the effect was less marked than observed in pneumocytes and was not dependent on concentration. These results are apparently in contradiction with previous studies of other authors on rat alveolar macrophages using trypan blue to measure cell viability, which is a less sensitive method [44]. Currently, it is unknown why macrophages, but not epithelial cells die at such a high rate; the different effects of the fumagillin depending on the cell type might be explained because the MetAP2 concentration could vary among tissues and cell types (https://www.proteinatlas.org; accessed 15 August 2021). In addition, fumagillin seems to protect, at least in early hours, the fungus from phagocytosis as assessed from increased phagocytosis of ∆fmaA conidia. In fact, when RAW 264.7 phagocytic cells were pre-treated with fumagillin, the phagocytic ability of these cells was significantly decreased after 6 and 8 h of co-incubation in comparison with the phagocytosis rates at this same time points of the cells untreated. Furthermore, the phagocytosis of the cells pre-treated was still significantly higher in contact with ∆fmaA strain at all times. These results, alongside the evidence that phagocytosis of the heat-inactivated conidia is similar in mutants and Wt strains, points out that the inhibition of the phagocytosis observed is because of the toxin effect over the macrophages and not because of an external structure defect of the conidia cell wall produced as a consequence of the genetic manipulation of the fungal strains. Moreover, it is important to note that the fumagillin produced by the Wt and complemented strains could be modulating the macrophages’ ETC and viability influencing the cell response, from their phagocytosis ability to TNF production. Indeed, TNF induction by BMMs was also overall lower in response to the ∆fmaA strain than to the Wt and complemented strains, although it was not statistically significant except at 4 h. Regarding in vivo assays, Liu and coworkers evaluated the virulence ability of the mutant A. fumigatus non-fumagillin producer strain ΔfumR [24]. For that, they used a corticosteroid immunosuppressed mice model, and they did not describe any virulence difference between the mutant and the Wt strain. Therefore, and due to the differences in the phagocytosis assays observed (Figure 6), we wanted to assess a neutropenic murine aspergillosis model to look at the role of the fmaA gene in virulence. Unexpectedly, the ∆fmaA::fmaA strain was significantly more lethal than the Wt and ∆fmaA strains. In contrast, the lowest mortality rate (although not significantly different to the Wt) was observed in those mice infected with the ∆fmaA strain. On the other hand, the CFUs analysis showed that most of the surviving mice infected with ∆fmaA strain did not contain viable fungus in their lungs, whereas a high fungal burden was detected in mice infected with the other strains at the end of the experiment. These results may indicate that the mortality caused by ∆fmaA, only observed during the first four days of infection, could be the result of the ability of this mutant to germinate faster than the others. Furthermore, the possible production of other virulence factors, such as proteases or other toxins, could be compensating for the lack of fumagillin, but this hypothesis has not been analyzed in this study. To our knowledge, this is not the first fumagillin research, but it is the first in-depth study of the role of fumagillin on A. fumigatus virulence, showing that this molecule can affect host cell homeostasis and that A. fumigatus shows an intrinsic resistance to its own toxin. Finally, in our murine model, whereas we found that mice infected with ∆fmaA survived with lower fungal burden than those infected with the wild type or the complemented strain, there was little overall difference in virulence dependent on this toxin.