3. Discussion The genus Pseudomonas includes several species with insecticidal properties, such as the well-known P. entomophila that acts by ingestion causing damages to the midgut epithelium of susceptible insects, exploiting a specific toxin secretion system [4]. Accordingly, genomic analyses of different pseudomonads have revealed some well-conserved insecticidal traits, in particular associated with the P. fluorescens group that, within clade-1, includes P. protegens. Consistently, our study demonstrated that strain CO1 of P. protegens, originally isolated from the hemolymph of diseased G. mellonella larvae [9], is toxic by ingestion to M. domestica and L. caesar larvae. Such results, corroborate previous reports on the per-os insecticidal potential of this bacterial species, supporting the ability of the bacterium to interact at the intestinal level [10]. Lethal effects were concentration-dependent, as normally expected for entomopathogenic bacteria acting by ingestion on these target insects [11]. LC50 values are comparable with those observed on other entomopathogenic bacteria with similar mode of action and effective on muscoid flies [12]. Our experiments conducted injecting bacterial cells in the house fly larvae haemocoel, showed that P. protegens reproduces well in the hemolymph, which represents a natural target substrate ultimately allowing the bacterium to express its biotic potential. However, when bacterial cells enter the insect body by ingestion, in order to reach the haemocoel, the intestinal barriers, mainly represented by the peritrophic matrix and the epithelium, have first to be overcome. Similar to other entomopathogenic bacterial species active by ingestion, such as the well-known Bacillus thuringiensis, the pathogenic process is expected to involve insecticidal toxins interacting specifically with the intestinal epithelium. Normally, this interaction involves the binding to epithelial cell receptors and the alteration of cell permeability with a consequent flux of ions and water, leading to the intestinal barrier disruption and allowing the bacterium to reach the hemocoel [13]. According to such scenario, in our ingestion experiments, dead larvae showed a bacterial septicaemia. To achieve this, the bacterium must be equipped with an adequate arsenal of toxins and virulence factors. Consistently, P. protegens was observed to harbor some insecticidal-related genes ([6], like other members of the P. fluorescens group, in which insecticidal toxin complex (Tc) gene homologues typical of the entomopathogenic nematode symbiont Xenorhabdus and Photorhabdus species, are frequently found [14]. In the case of P. protegens, the insecticidal potential has been attributed to the fluorescent insecticidal toxin (Fit), a large protein similar to the Makes caterpillars floppy (Mcf) toxin produced by Photorhabdus luminescens [7]. The fitD gene domain is flanked by a protein secretion system including fitABC and fitE genes and the regulatory genes fitG and fitH. While the expression of fitD gene after bacterial injection or ingestion was shown to be involved in the insecticidal action, significant per os toxicity of P. protegens mutants lacking fitD gene was observed in Drosophila melanogaster, which supported a more complex mechanism of action involving other virulence factors, among which orfamide A, chitinases and phospholipases were reported as possible candidates [6,8]. Although the implication of some of these compounds in the insecticidal action has been at least partially documented, numerous aspects of the mechanism of action remain unclear. Our study with house fly larvae investigated the possible role of a selection of genes, well conserved in the genome of P. protegens, in the initial phase of infection, following ingestion of bacterial cells. The overtime increasing over-expression of these genes, supports their involvement in an action against midgut barriers, which would precede haemocoel invasion and septicemia. In addition to FitD that might be directly involved in cytotoxicity toward epithelial cells [15,16], the observed upregulation of chitinase D may significantly help overcoming the first barrier offered by the peritrophic matrix containing chitin. This hypothesis corroborates the mode of action observed in Tc-like protein complexes containing eighter insecticidal toxins and chitinases acting synergistically to break through the intestinal barrier [17]. The engagement of other putative virulence factors such as pesticine, hipA and relE may further increase P. protegens virulence and help counteracting the innate immune response that normally comes into action at the gut level of insects challenged with an entomopathogenic bacterium to which they are susceptible [18]. The same and other virulence factors expressed by P. protegens might later be involved in favoring the successive stages of the pathogenic process within the insect body. A wider overview of the bacterial metabolites involved in pathogenesis against muscoid flies would be provided by a broader transcriptomic analysis involving RNA-seq analyses. According to our observations and to the discovery of several metabolites P. protegens may produce, the pathogenic interaction this bacterium can establish with different targets appear to be complex and multifactorial [16]. Evidence in our study of the biocidal potential against pests of veterinary importance, provides additional biological information to the previously reported bioinsecticidal action this bacterial species shows against crop pests and its plasticity establishing plant-beneficial interactions [19]. Despite different degrees of virulence are expected to be associated with diverse P. protegens strains, the maintenance within the species of an arsenal of toxins and virulence factors, suggests an evolutionary process in which a conserved pathogenic relationship with insects became established. Future studies will clarify the target range and the role of specific bacterial virulence factors in pathogenesis.