3. Discussion Antibiotic resistance is one of the biggest threats to human health and food security. The infections of humans or animals caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria will increase mortality and medical costs. Understanding more about the resistance mechanisms will be helpful for better treatment of infections caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Glucosylation inactivation is one of the important resistance mechanisms [24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37]. However, if other glycosylation modifications will inactivate antibiotics is not clear. Herein, we took macrolide antibiotic midecamycin as the research object and demonstrated that besides glucosylation, other glycosylation modifications could cause antibiotics inactivation for the first time. This work has at least three contributions to the new cognition in this field. First, this study provided a novel mechanism for midecamycin inactivation. Midecamycin is an important macrolide antibiotic. The research on its inactivation mechanism contributed to the comprehensive understanding of macrolide resistance. In this manuscript, we convincingly demonstrated glycosylation inactivation was a novel mechanism of midecamycin resistance, which broadened the understanding of midecamycin resistance. Second, we demonstrated that glycosylation inactivation of midecamycin was independent of the type of attached sugar moieties at its inactivation site. Varied glycosylation modifications, including glucosylation, xylosylation and O-GlcNAcylation, could inactivate midecamycin, suggesting varied glycosylation modifications at the same inactivation site could lead to antibiotic resistance. Finally, O-GlcNAcylation improvement of midecamycin was achieved in this investigation. The wild OleD displayed a low O-GlcNAcylation efficiency towards midecamycin, which limited the scale preparation of midecamycin 2′-O-acetylglucosamine. The protein engineering was performed to enhance the O-GlcNAcylation efficiency of OleD. The residue Q327 was identified as the key amino acid regulating O-GlcNAcylation of OleD. Q327F was determined as the most favorable OleD variant with seven times conversion enhancement towards UDP-GlcNAc. These data provided a reference for activity improvement of other modifying enzymes. The facts convincingly demonstrated that varied glycosylation modifications, including glucosylation, xylosylation and O-GlcNAcylation could inactivate midecamycin. Besides glycosylation modifications, the resistance to midecamycin could also be achieved by the combinational modification of phosphorylation of 2′-OH and reduction at the 18-formyl group (18-dihydro-2′-O-phosphorylmidecamycin) [34,35]. These evidences suggest that multiple modifications at 2′-OH can cause midecamycin inactivation. Hence, 2′-OH is a key determinator for midecamycin activity. 2′-OH of the desosamine moiety, which locates at C5 position of midecamycin and some macrolides, can make specific hydrogen bond interaction with the nucleobase of A2058 of the 23S rRNA, thereby facilitating the occupation of macrolide drugs in the nascent peptide exit tunnel. The glycosylation at 2′-OH might blocked the binding between the desosamine hydroxyl and the N1 atom of A2058, thus leading to macrolide resistance [18,59]. We demonstrated the glycosylation inactivation occurred in midecamycin herein. Still, more evidences are required to determine the exact action mechanism of glycosylation inactivation. Glycosylation inactivation had been explored comprehensively in S.
antibioticus, the producer of the well-known macrolide oleandomycin [28,29,30,31,43]. An array of GTs capable of glycosylating macrolides had been identified, suggesting macrolide-inactivating GTs might exist extensively in antibiotic-producing organisms [28,29,30,31,43,51,52,53,60]. An OleD isoenzyme might exist in the midecamycin-producing species S. mycarofaciens [61]. Further study on this glycosyltransferase will help to understand the inactivation mechanism of midecamycin glycosylation. Cumulatively, this investigation will thus lay a foundation for the mechanism clarification of macrolide resistance and the development of GT inhibitors as drugs.