Discussion The low electron discharge efficiency of phenazines to the anode of a BES and the poor understanding of the physiology of phenazine electron transport presents a challenge for further developing an oxygen‐limited bioprocess that would be supported by phenazine electron mediation. We anticipated that if periplasmic redox enzymes interact with phenazines, improving such interaction could increase the electron flux to the anode, as it has been observed for the synthetic redox mediator ferricyanide (Yu et al., 2018) with which highly efficient glucose oxidation to 2‐ketogluconate was coupled to anodic electron discharge. Here, we have confirmed that the periplasmic PQQ‐dependent glucose dehydrogenase (Gcd) is able to reduce PCA and PYO. PCA, the precursor of PYO, had an about 60‐fold lower enzymatic reduction rate than PYO (Fig. 2). The reason might be their structural difference or their different redox properties (E°’[PCA]=−0.24 V; E°’[PYO]=−0.18 V vs. Ag/AgClsat.) (Bosire et al., 2016). The different functional groups surrounding the core phenazine structure have been shown to affect both, the chemical properties such as partitioning coefficients and the redox potentials of the individual derivatives (Bellin et al., 2014). Nevertheless, the longer half‐life exhibited by PCA in BES operations resulted in a better performance over time compared to PYO (Fig. 3). Hence, PCA is better suited if long‐term phenazine electron mediation is desired. Since phenazine electron discharge in Pseudomonas is not limited to glucose as a substrate, we also investigated other PQQ‐dependent periplasmic enzymes. The alcohol substrates 2,3‐butanediol and ethanol also show anodic current production (Bosire et al., 2016) and can be metabolized by the periplasmic PQQ‐dependent ethanol dehydrogenase (Edh). However, the in vitro assay of this enzyme showed no reduction of PCA or PYO with either of the alcohols (data not shown). In contrast, the artificial electron acceptor DCPIP was reduced in this assay, showing functionality of the Edh enzyme. The PQQ‐dependent enzyme reaction is believed to use the same (hydrid) transfer mechanism for both alcohol (Edh) and aldehyde (Gcd) dehydrogenases (Anthony, 1996; Oubrie et al., 1999). Nonetheless, factors such as differences in the charged amino acid residues around the substrate entrance pocket might still influence electron acceptor preference (Hiraka et al., 2020). The mode of extracellular electron transfer achieved in vivo using phenazines or other redox mediators, however, does not only depend on the enzymes, which directly catalyse the reduction of these mediators. Other respiratory components of the cell, such as menaquinone, cytochrome reductase and terminal oxidases, were recently shown to play a critical role in the reduction of these mediators (Feng et al., 2020; Jo et al., 2020; Lai et al., 2020). However, the delay experienced in attaining peak currents with the Gcd mutant strain in addition to the improved current from the overexpression strain point to a central role of periplasmic Gcd for phenazine‐based electron discharge. Further research is now required to elucidate a possible connection of the Gcd‐phenazine interaction to the reported components of the electron transport chain. While our results from the periplasmic enzyme investigation in the BES showed a strong involvement of the glucose oxidation pathway in phenazine charging, they also showed that even when this pathway is abolished in the Gcd mutant strain, electrons are transferred to phenazines. If glucose cannot be oxidized in the periplasm, it is directly taken up into the cytoplasm and phosphorylated by a glucokinase (Nikel et al., 2015). Although several cytoplasmic enzymes have been shown to be able to reduce phenazines (Glasser et al., 2017; Jo et al., 2020), it was not clear if phenazines could re‐enter the cytoplasm once they were released after their synthesis. Since phenazines themselves are also toxic, Pseudomonas aeruginosa uses different mechanisms such as a MexGHI‐OpmD efflux pump and PumA, a monoxygenase, for self‐resistance (Sakhtah et al., 2016; Sporer et al., 2018). While the efflux pump is speculated to be involved in phenazine expulsion, no putative entry pathway has been proposed yet. A direct observation of the phenazine transfer across the cell membrane is difficult due to the lack of labelling strategies for phenazines. Instead, with the aid of molecular biosensors, we here show that both phenazines can have access to the cytoplasm once released and consequently access the electron pool in this part of the cell. However, taking all presented experiments together; the sustainability of extracellular current production in the Gcd deletion mutant, the established uptake of PCA and the probable uptake of PYO into the cytoplasm; it is not clear yet, why this access to metabolic electrons is so limited, that is does not translate to higher coulombic efficiencies. Potentially, several central enzymes of the glucose catabolism should be able to reduce phenazines, diverting electrons away from the native electron transport chain for oxygen reduction. Moreover, the fact that phenazine reduction is influenced by components of the electron transport chain (Jo et al., 2020), gives further indication that there must be mechanism to prevent cytosolic enzymes from reducing phenazines. This makes sense from an energetic point of view, because phenazine reduction by catabolic enzymes would result in the loss of reducing equivalents without energy conservation. Therefore, a better understanding of the control or synergy between catabolic enzyme catalysed phenazine reduction and reduction of phenazine by components of the respiratory chain would provide a wider view to understand and improve phenazine extracellular electron transfer. With this next level of insight, finally an answer could be found to the question if and how phenazine‐based electron discharge can or could be coupled to cellular ATP generation.