4. Discussion In this study, the first data on P. jirovecii impdh gene diversity were obtained. To the best of our knowledge, data on the diversity of the impdh gene in the most studied Pneumocystis species, specifically P. carinii, from rats and P. murina, from mice, are not available. Nonetheless, IMPDH of P. carinii as a potential drug target of MPA was previously evaluated by O’Gara and colleagues [16]. P. carinii’s sensitivity to MPA was established using a short-term culture of P. carinii [16]. This sensitivity was confirmed using an IMPDH-deficient strain of Escherichia coli complemented with a plasmid containing the P. carinii impdh gene [16]. Among the nine SNP identified in the overall P. jirovecii specimens from 26 patients, 6 were synonymous mutations, whereas 3 others, Ala26Ser, Ala261Thr and Gly439Ser, resulted in missense mutations. Since the two first mutations Ala26Ser and Gly439Ser are located within non-conserved regions, they might represent natural polymorphisms that might not affect protein function as it has been established in the human IMPDH1 (hIMPDH1) [7,26]. Nonetheless, since the mutation Gly439Ser is located in a hinge region, an effect on enzymatic activity cannot be ruled out. The mutation Ala261Thr is located in a highly conserved region in fungal IMPDHs, Ala being itself a highly conserved residue, considering our alignments (Figure 1) combined with data reported by Freedman and colleagues [24] who aligned 20,000 fungal IMPDHs and found that the residues at analogous position 261 (the position identified in P. jirovecii IMPDH in the present study) were 91% Ala, 7.3% Gly, 1.2% Ser, 0.1% Thr and 0.1% Val [24]. Interestingly, fungi displaying natural or acquired resistance to MPA or at least naturally exposed to MPA in their environment were previously described to harbour a Ser or a Thr residue at the corresponding position in the IMPDH protein sequence. For example, a substitution from Ala to Thr (Ala251Thr) has been identified in an MPA-resistant strain of C. albicans selected under a high concentration of MPA (10 µg/mL) (Figure 1) [21]. Similarly, P. brevicompactum IMPDH-A (PbIMPDHA-MPAR), S. cerevisiae IMPDH2 (ScIMPDH2-MPAR) and M. guillermondii IMPDH2 (MgIMPDH2-MPAR) harbour a substitution from Ala to Ser at the analogous position (Ala267Ser, Ala253Ser and Ala251Ser, respectively) [22,23,24] (Figure 1), these three fungi being naturally resistant to MPA. Consequently, the Ala to Ser or Thr substitution in IMPDHs thus, stands out as a critical determinant of MPA-resistance in fungi [22,23,24]. Moreover, the in vitro substitution of Ala267 with Ser made the IMPDH of Aspergillus nidulans, a naturally MPA-sensitive fungus, resistant to MPA [24]. Interestingly, the mutation Ala261Thr in P. jirovecii IMPDH was found only in the 10 SOT recipients enrolled in the study, all of them being still subject to anti-rejection treatment with MPA at the date of PCP diagnosis. Nonetheless, putative resistance of P. jirovecii to MPA is probably not a risk factor for PCP occurrence. Indeed, the patients developed PCP because none of them were undergoing chemoprophylaxis when P. jirovecii infections occurred. In fact, the post-transplantation period ranged from 8 months to 216 months, whereas the duration of recommended prophylaxis is limited to 6–12 months after transplantation [5]. However, the mutation Ala261Thr among P. jirovecii isolates from SOT patients may represent a signature of MPA exposure and the circulation and transmission of specific P. jirovecii strains in susceptible patient populations. This signature of MPA exposure was previously pointed out in environmental fungal species such as Aspergillus glaucus, Aspergillus clavatus, Aspergillus terreus, which encode IMPDHs harbouring Ser or Thr at the analogous position [24]. These environmental moulds have probably been confronted with MPA during their evolution since they are known to develop in natural niches shared with Penicillium species that naturally produce MPA [24]. Consequently, MPA may have favoured the emergence of specific strains of P. jirovecii revealed by this specific mutation in SOT recipients. It is noteworthy that SOT recipients T3 and T9 harboured allele IMPDH-3 (characterised by the G1020A mutation resulting in Ala261Thr) in combination with allele IMPDH-1, whereas the remaining eight SOT recipients harboured IMPDH-3 solely. These mixed infections may be explained by an in-progress process of selection of P. jirovecii organisms under MPA pressure, wild P. jirovecii strains being not entirely replaced by a predominant mutant P. jirovecii strain. While MPA was initially considered to protect against P. jirovecii in the 1990s [8], an increase in PCP cases in SOT recipients has been reported, particularly in RTR, in a context of nosocomial infection over the past 15 years [6,27]. At present, MPA is identified as one of risk factors for PCP [28]. This paradigm shift could be explained in part by MPA pressure on P. jirovecii populations, selection of specific strains characterised by potentially lower sensitivity to MPA and acquisition/transmission of these specific strains among susceptible SOT recipients. The phenomenon of P. jirovecii selection under drug pressure has already been reported with the description of specific genotypes/phenotypes of dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) in patients treated with sulfonamides that target the DHPS [14,29,30]. Prior exposure to these drugs was identified as the main predictor of P. jirovecii DHPS mutants [14,29,30]. The patients’ city of residence, whether or not they had prior exposure to sulfonamides, has been identified as another predictor of P. jirovecii DHPS mutants [14,29]. This observation was explained by possible P. jirovecii transmission from infected, treated patients to susceptible, untreated patients. Similarly, we recently described a P. jirovecii mutant of the gene of cytochrome b (CYB), which is the target of atovaquone [11]. This mutant was spread in HTR who were effectively subject to PCP prophylaxis by atovaquone, but also in HTR without prior exposure to atovaquone, in a context of PCP outbreak [11]. For these reasons, analysis of DHPS locus and CYB genes serves as a marker of P. jirovecii circulation within human communities. The presence of allele IMPDH-3 (characterised by the G1020A mutation resulting in Ala261Thr) and the low diversity of the P. jirovecii impdh gene in SOT recipients suggest a common identical source of the fungus in this patient group. Conversely, the high diversity of impdh gene, as well as the absence of the IMPDH-3 allele suggest several different sources of P. jirovecii in the control group. This diversity resulted in the identification of nine SNPs and eight alleles. Considering the potential of impdh gene analysis in contributing to a method of P. jirovecii genotyping, we evaluated the Hunter index at 0.6952 (<0.95) [31]. This value is insufficient to distinguish P. jirovecii isolates in a genotyping approach based on this sole locus. Nonetheless, impdh gene analysis could be added to the highly discriminative multilocus sequence typing (MLST) method combining mtLSUrRNA, CYB and superoxide dismutase gene analysis, that we have used to investigate Pneumocystis case clusters in hospital [32]. Impdh gene analysis could provide an additional marker of P. jirovecii circulation among SOT recipients who are specifically at risk for PCP occurrence in a context of nosocomial acquisition of P. jirovecii and PCP outbreaks. MLST analysis including impdh gene may strengthen the concept of acquisition and transmission of specific P. jirovecii strains in SOT recipients, which has previously been discussed [6,33,34]. To sum up, we pointed out a missense mutation Ala261Thr in SOT recipients treated with MPA, whereas this change was not found in a control group without prior exposure to MPA. This mutation may represent the signature of MPA exposure and the selection of specific P. jirovecii strains under selection pressure that circulate in the SOT recipient population. A multicentre study, combining the enrolment of patients from diverse geographical regions and the genotyping of P. jirovecii specimens based on the aforementioned MLST approach is now warranted.