Discussion In this study, we analysed over 16 terabases of bacterial DNA sequences and predicted 1614 previously unknown erm genes (841 unique protein sequences) across 392 gene families, as well as 1428 previously unknown mph genes (847 unique protein sequences) across 227 gene families (Table S4). Considering that only 44 predicted gene families (6.63%) contained previously described erm and mph genes, our findings expand the known macrolide resistome more than tenfold and thus provide a more accurate description of its size and diversity [16]. Particularly, our results show that previously unknown erm and mph ARGs are especially common in Firmicutes and Actinobacteria, while their frequency in Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes is low in relation to their presence in the sequence repositories. Furthermore, the analysis of metagenomic data indicated that there is a large diversity of erm and mph resistance genes in the microbiome of both humans and domesticated animals. This shows that commensal bacteria – especially Firmicutes and Actinobacteria – contain a large reservoir of macrolide resistance genes that can be mobilized and spread [50]. It should also be emphasized that many new genes were found in environmental metagenomes and in unculturable bacterial species (especially erm genes), which are significantly under-represented in current genome databases, suggesting that the total diversity of the macrolide resistome is likely considerably larger than outlined in this study. Genes from six new families were found to be localized on MGEs in pathogens. When expressing these genes in 

E. coli

, four of six were shown to induce a resistance phenotype, thus validating that they are functional and can provide increased macrolide resistance in Proteobacteria. It should be emphasized that the two genes that did not result in a resistance phenotype could be functional in other hosts. Indeed, we were unable to validate the resistance phenotype for the new G883 (UGF171), which was related to erm(F), a gene that is functional in, e.g. 

Bacteroides fragilis

 but has previously been reported to not be functional in 

E. coli

 (though conflicting reports exist) [51, 52]. Furthermore, several of the new pathogen-associated mobile genes were found in Enterobacteriaceae or 

Pseudomonas

, which are intrinsically resistant to lower concentrations of most macrolides [53]. This suggests that the genes have either been promoted in these pathogens under high macrolide selection pressures or that the genes were co-selected together with other ARGs, possibly through co-localization on MGEs. The latter is supported by the observation that genes from all these families were found on contigs together with genes conferring resistance to other antibiotics, including aminoglycosides [e.g. aac(6’)−29a, aph(3’’)-Ib], beta-lactams (e.g. bla
TEM-1B, bla
NDM-1) and tetracyclines [e.g. tet(B), tet(X4)]. It is thus plausible that co-selection has played an important role in the dissemination of new macrolide resistance genes among proteobacterial pathogens. The phylogenetic analysis revealed that macrolide resistance genes representing five of the six new pathogen-associated mobile gene families were found in species outside their indicated phylum of origin. This shows that inter-phyla transfer events of macrolide resistance genes do not only include a few widespread macrolide resistance genes, such as erm(A), erm(B) and mph(B), but also several new genes. Interestingly, genes from four of the new pathogen-associated mobile families were found located close to one or more genes encoding components of conjugation systems, including MOB relaxases, mating pair formation (MPF) genes, and type IV coupling proteins. The MOB genes found close to genes from UGF171 and UGF45 were of types that have a documented broad host range (P/Q according to the nomenclature of Smillie et al.) and have been previously reported in multiple phyla, including Proteobacteria, Firmicutes and Actinobacteria [54]. This suggests that conjugation enables the transfer of new macrolide resistance genes over very large evolutionary distances. Furthermore, genes from five of the pathogen-associated mobile gene families were found in the genetic vicinity of insertion sequences (ISs). Notably, ISCR2 – a member of the ISCR family that uses a rolling circle transposition mechanism to move adjacent genes [55] – was found close to a total of 11 genes representing two new erm families and one new mph family (Table 3). ISCR2 is one of the most widespread ISCRs and has previously been reported to be involved in the dissemination of multiple types of resistance genes, including macrolide phosphotransferases [56]. Since ISCR2 was associated with genes from three of the six mobile gene families found in pathogens, it suggests that this MGE plays an important role in the dissemination of new macrolide resistance genes. However, ISCR2 has, to our knowledge, not been identified outside of Proteobacteria to date, and indeed all occurrences identified in this study were in Proteobacteria. This would suggest that these new genes became associated with ISCR2 after the initial inter-phyla transfer event and that other HGT mechanisms could have been responsible for their original mobilization. Furthermore, as the sequence identity shared between most of the new pathogen-associated mobile erm genes and their closest chromosomal genes in commensal or environmental bacteria was generally low (as low as 34.5% amino acid identity), this suggests either that the original mobilization of these genes happened in the ancient past or that the mobilization was more recent but the original host(s) are not represented in the databases. However, the mph family UGF5 of mobile genes in Enterobacteriaceae shared as much as 83.7% amino acid identity with chromosomal genes in Sphingobacteriaceae, indicating that this may be the result of a more recent transfer event. Macrolide ARGs are present in bacteria from many phyla, however, their origin and evolutionary history have been largely unknown [57]. The phylogenetic analysis presented in this study provides a more detailed insight into their evolutionary history. For erm genes, we noted that the most widespread variants, including erm(A), erm(B) and erm(C), all clustered together into a single monophyletic clade together with species from the class Bacilli (cluster F.1, Fig. 3). Even though we were unable to identify their exact origin, it is clear that these genes share a close evolutionary relationship with Bacilli. Indeed, erm(A), erm(B) and erm(C) are all ubiquitously present in species from this class, especially in Bacillales, including 

Staphylococcus

 spp. [erm(A), erm(C)], and in Lactobacillales, including 

Streptococcus

 spp. [erm(B)]. Our phylogenetic analysis showed that all of these genes have undergone extensive HGT and they could be detected in both evolutionarily close and distant parts of the taxonomic tree (e.g. four, five and seven different phyla, respectively). Several of these transfer events have likely happened in the human or animal microbiome. For example, erm(B) had been transferred into a large number of pathogenic and non-pathogenic species from Clostridia (52), which, together with Bacilli, are ubiquitously present in the human and animal gut [58]. This indicates that the connectivity provided in the human microbiome, in combination with the presence of suitable MGEs and strong selection pressures caused by antibiotic consumption, may have favoured the mobilization and transfer of erm genes from their original hosts in Bacilli. We noted, however, that environmental Bacilli from the genus 

Oceanobacillus

 were also represented within cluster F.1. Though some species from this genus are known to colonize the human microbiome (e.g. 

Oceanobacillus picturae

, 

Oceanobacillus massiliensis

) [59, 60], an origin for erm(A), erm(B) and erm(C) outside the human and animal microbiome cannot be excluded. In contrast, the most common mph genes [mph(A), mph(B), mph(C) and mph(E)] showed more diverse origins [12]. The phylogenetic analysis suggested that mph(A) originates from Proteobacteria, specifically Enterobacteriaceae, while mph(B) and mph(C) originate from Firmicutes (Clostridia and Bacilli, respectively). Finally, mph(E) was closely related to genes in Bacteriodetes, especially Sphingobacteriaceae, but was only found in one species from that phylum (

Myroides odoratimimus

), which likely reflects the under-representation of these genomes in the databases. Moreover, all of the most common mph genes, except for mph(C), have spread to several parts of the taxonomic tree, including many pathogens in Enterobacteriaceae. Indeed, mph(A) was, in addition to Proteobacteria, identified in Firmicutes (

Streptococcus suis

), while mph(B) and mph(E) were, in addition to their proposed original phyla, found in several proteobacterial species. We noted that mph(C), despite having a similar origin to mph(B) and being associated with MGEs, was not observed outside of Firmicutes. Our analysis of the genetic context showed that mph(B) genes were located on plasmids known to be associated with ARGs in Enterobacteriaceae (IncF, IncI, IncH) [61], likely explaining how they have been able to successfully spread among Proteobacteria. The association with an MGE with sufficient host range could thus explain why mph(B) has been able to successfully transfer to Proteobacteria when mph(C) has not. Indeed, previous studies have shown that mph(C) is fully functional when expressed in Enterobacteriaceae [62], suggesting that gene compatibility may not be a barrier. Nevertheless, our analysis underlines that mph genes are highly promiscuous and that they have been mobilized from several different phyla and transferred over large phylogenetic distances into human pathogens. This further demonstrates the need to characterize the full resistome, including the many mph genes that are present in distantly related species in order to understand their origin and evolutionary history. Macrolides are naturally produced by several actinobacterial species, which carry a large diversity of ARGs, especially erm genes, that provide the means for self-resistance [63]. These genes are rarely transferred outside their phylum of origin and we, similarly to previous studies, found no indication that any of the common clinically relevant macrolide ARGs have been mobilized from Actinobacteria. However, contrary to some previous suggestions [64], our results show instances where macrolide resistance genes have successfully spread from antibiotic-producing Actinobacteria into Proteobacteria, proving that, while uncommon, it does occur. As an example, the new erm family UGF311, which was most closely related (41.2–44.3 % amino acid identity) to chromosomal genes found in the macrolide-producing Actinobacteria 

Pseudonocardia

 sp. and 

Streptomyces venezuelae

 [erm(31)] [3, 65], was identified on MGEs in 

P. aeruginosa

. Similarly, the new mph family UGF100, which was most closely related (47.8–50.8% amino acid identity) to chromosomal genes in the actinobacterial family Micrococcaceae (especially 

Zhihengliuella halotolerans

), was found in the Deltaproteobacteria 

Myxococcus

 spp. and 

Corallococcus

 spp. When expressed in 

E. coli

, both these genes showed a significant impact on growth under a selection of erythromycin and azithromycin, demonstrating that these genes are compatible with proteobacterial hosts. UGF100 was commonly encountered in the predatory Myxococcus xantus, while UGF311 was flanked by IS elements relatively similar (67.3–86.1% amino acid identity) to ones associated with the predatory species 

Cupriavidus necator

 (IS883) [66]. Both 

M. xanthus

 and 

C. necator

 are known to prey on Actinobacteria and have recently been shown to be able to efficiently acquire actinobacterial genes (our data, unpublished). Based on these observations, we hypothesize that predatory bacteria may serve an important role in the inter-phyla transfer of ARGs in soil where they act as an intermediary between Actinobacteria and pathogenic Proteobacteria. It should, in this context, also be noted that transfers of macrolide resistance genes from Actinobacteria present in the human microbiome – such as 

Bifidobacterium

 spp., 

Corynebacterium

 spp. and 

Brachybacterium

 spp. – into Firmicutes and Proteobacteria have been reported but seems to be rare [e.g. erm(X) and erm(50)] [67]. Taken together, our results show that HGT of macrolide resistance genes from Actinobacteria to pathogens from other phyla is possible but limited. This is likely due to a combination of a multitude of barriers, such as the unavailability of MGEs with sufficient host range [54], missing ecological connectivity, and a lack of sufficiently strong selection pressures in some environments [18]. Thus, even though both commensal and environmental Actinobacteria carry a large and diverse macrolide resistome, they do not seem to yet have contributed significantly to the increasing macrolide resistance in human pathogens. The genes identified in this study are based on computational predictions and should, until their function has been experimentally validated, be treated as putative macrolide resistance genes. Further analysis of the induced resistance phenotypes in pathogenic hosts beyond 

E. coli

 will be necessary to assess their full clinical relevance. We observed, however, a relatively even distribution of known, clinically relevant macrolide resistance determinants among the main clades found in the phylogenetic trees (Figs. 3 and 4) indicating that the predicted genes may confer a similar phenotype, unless their functionality has been recently lost. Indeed, it was noted that a certain degree of false positives was unavoidable when creating the Erm models, likely due to the close evolutionary relationship between erm genes and housekeeping methyltransferases of the KsgA family [11]. However, these ksgA genes were easily identified from their position in the phylogenetic tree (Fig. 3), and could thus be excluded from further consideration. Nonetheless, previous studies using the same methodology have displayed a high predictive power for other classes of resistance genes [20], and the experimental validation of selected new genes, where seven of ten gave resistance in 

E. coli

, proves that our methodology could accurately predict functional new genes.