Discussion Prior studies on the suppression of potato scab have indicated a potential biocontrol role for Pseudomonas bacteria (Arseneault et al., 2015; Arseneault et al., 2013; Elphinstone et al., 2009; Rosenzweig et al., 2012). Fluorescent pseudomonads form multiple beneficial relationships with plants, including growth promotion and biocontrol (Haas and Défago, 2005; Zamioudis et al., 2013). However, there is limited understanding of the genetic factors that are critical for such activity, and little is known about the diversity of the P. fluorescens species group within a given agricultural field or how this population is shaped by environmental changes. In this study, we integrated genomics, metabolomics, phenotypic analysis, molecular biology, and in planta assays to identify the genetic determinants of Pseudomonas antagonism towards S. scabies. This population-level approach shows that the P. fluorescens population in a single field is highly complex, heterogeneous, and dynamic (Figures 2, 3 and 8), where the overall genotypic diversity is similar to the global diversity of P. fluorescens (Garrido-Sanz et al., 2016). Pan-genome analysis and metagenomics represent increasingly powerful routes to understanding the genetic determinants of biological activity in plant-associated microbes (Beskrovnaya et al., 2020; Biessy et al., 2019; Carrión et al., 2019; Melnyk et al., 2019; Mullins et al., 2019; Tracanna et al., 2021). Multiple BGCs and accessory genome loci were identified that correlated with on-plate inhibition of S. scabies growth and development (Figure 3), including BGCs for CLPs and HCN. These loci also correlated with inhibition of P. infestans and G. graminis, and their contribution to suppression was validated genetically. This confirmed a role for both molecules in S. scabies inhibition (Figures 5 and 6), representing a new function for these Pseudomonas specialized metabolites. Co-culture assays and cryo-SEM imaging (Figure 6) showed that HCN and a tensin-like CLP produced by Ps619 arrest the formation of streptomycete aerial hyphae and subsequent sporulation, providing the pseudomonad with a competitive advantage at the microbial interface. In planta experiments confirmed that Ps619 could suppress potato scab and that CLP production was a key determinant of this inhibitory effect (Figure 7). In contrast, HCN production was not a requirement for potato scab suppression by Ps619. It is possible that HCN is not produced in sufficient amounts during root colonization for S. scabies inhibition, or that it instead has an alternative natural role, such as metal chelation (Rijavec and Lapanje, 2016). The roles of the CLPs are reminiscent of the interaction between B. subtilis and S. coelicolor, where the CLP surfactin functions as a surfactant required for the formation of aerial structures in B. subtilis and arrests aerial development in S. coelicolor (Straight et al., 2006). Collectively, these results are surprising given that streptomycetes themselves use surfactants to assist in the erection of aerial mycelia (Kodani et al., 2004; Willey et al., 2006) and points to secondary antagonistic roles for these molecules beyond the reduction of surface tension. This is strongly supported by the inhibitory effect of purified viscosin I towards S. scabies (Figure 5C). HCN and CLPs have also been associated with insect (Flury et al., 2017) and nematode (Siddiqui et al., 2006) killing, as well as the suppression of pathogenic fungi (Michelsen et al., 2015; Fukuda et al., 2021). This indicates that a subset of pseudomonads are generalist suppressors of pathogens (and presumably also nonpathogenic organisms) due to the production of these broad range antimicrobials. Genetic analysis indicates that these strains are more likely to produce multiple suppressive metabolites and proteins. Evidence for this is provided by the inhibition of both P. infestans and G. graminis by Ps619 ΔhcnΔten (Appendix 2—figure 1). A study of the inhibitory properties of bacteria associated with the Arabidopsis leaf microbiome showed that a large proportion of the total inhibitory activity was due to Pseudomonadales bacteria and that a subset of individual strains were active against a wide array of bacteria (Helfrich et al., 2018). Unexpectedly, irrigation led to a decrease in the proportion of suppressive pseudomonads on potato roots (Figure 8A) even though irrigation is one of the most effective ways to suppress potato scab. One possible reason for this discrepancy is that irrigation enables nonsuppressive Pseudomonas spp. with low motility to be transported to plant roots more effectively. Recruitment of nonsuppressive pseudomonads to the rhizosphere may benefit the plant in other ways, such as immune system priming (Bakker et al., 2007; Teixeira et al., 2021) or modulation of auxin biosynthesis. For example, Cheng et al., 2017 showed that auxin biosynthesis was linked to plant growth promotion and induced systemic resistance by P. fluorescens SS101. An alternative hypothesis is that changes in the overall relative abundance of soil Pseudomonas over Streptomyces resulting from irrigation may override the observed shift towards less-suppressive Pseudomonas genotypes. In support of this, drought-induced enrichment for commensal Streptomyces and depletion of Proteobacteria in sorghum and rice plants have been shown to be reversed by irrigation (Santos-Medellín et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2018). In this model, irrigation may reduce the relative fitness of S. scabies versus Pseudomonas spp., while the microbiome of irrigated roots simultaneously becomes less optimal for disease suppression. Our data show that Ps619 is highly effective at inhibiting potato scab, yet Ps619-like strains are naturally less abundant in irrigated conditions. Therefore, possible future efforts to control potato scab could combine irrigation with pretreatment with effective biocontrol strains, like Ps619, to ensure tubers are colonized by a significant proportion of biocontrol strains. Such a strategy could reduce the quantity of water required for effective scab suppression. While our study was focused on fluorescent pseudomonads, interactions between these bacteria and the wider microbiome (Figure 1) may also have a key role in potato scab suppression. Moving forward, systematic analyses of individual organisms within microbiomes will continue to help answer questions relating to microbial communities and host interactions that are difficult to address using global ‘omics approaches alone. For example, the role of many bacterial specialized metabolites in nature is poorly understood, especially for prolific producers such as the pseudomonads and the streptomycetes (van der Meij et al., 2017). Future studies could examine whether the host selects for bacterial populations enriched in specific BGCs and whether environmental stimuli modulate the abundance of these BGCs. Synthetic microbial communities based on well-characterized natural communities could then be used to test hypotheses on the role of specialized metabolites in shaping the community or modulating the health of the host organism.