3. Discussion Antibiotic misuse is particularly dangerous, and not only because it provides selective pressure for the evolution of antibiotic resistance (AR). Even more importantly, antibiotics clear the natural protective shield provided by commensals, thus outcompeting pathogens in their microenvironments. The development of probiotic strains is important in this context since they may act in a dual mode: (i) direct killing AR pathogens, and (ii) reconstituting the degraded microbiota shield. Moreover, probiotics may provide essential signals for the host immunity, regulating autoimmunity and providing stimuli often found in nature but lost during urbanization. Here, ultrahigh-throughput microfluidic technology was applied for the isolation of bacterial killers serving as natural probiotics in the microbiomes of different wild animals. Despite the large differences in microbiota composition and the presence of source-specific killing strains, antagonistic strains of B. pumilus were isolated repeatedly. While a more extensive study should reveal the prevalence of the described B. pumilus strains in wild animals and depict their impact on hosts, the repeated isolation of antagonistic B. pumilus strains indicates their ubiquity and significant influence on ecological niches. Metabolomics and genomics were applied to provide a comprehensive description of these strains. Surprisingly, a common set of BGCs encoding Ami, siderophore bacillibactin, and putative analogs of antimicrobials including bacilysin, class IId cyclical bacteriocin, surfactin, and desferrioxamine was detected. Activity-based metabolomic analysis revealed that Ami is the principal antibiotic component produced by B. pumilus. Ami is a potent inhibitor of translation [35] displaying mediocre activity against the majority of Gram-negative bacteria [20]. Isolated B. pumilus strains efficiently inhibited the growth of both Gram-positive S. aureus and Gram-negative E. coli in coculture. We suggest that probiotic B. pumilus strains display their antagonistic properties by the complex action of B. pumilus secondary metabolites. While the exact metabolite(s), potentiating Ami are still to be determined, we believe that the discovered biosynthetic fingerprint is essential for the described antagonism. Genome mining indicates that Ami-producing strains may be observed in numerous Bacillus, Paenibacillus, and related species. The core Ami cluster genes have similar architectures for Bacillus and Paenibacillus. However, mechanisms of Ami transport and self-resistance discovered for Ami [19,32] are different in Paenibacillus. We speculate that Ami acetylation may take place, as was previously described in Ami-producing Xenorhabdus bovienii [33] and a related ZmA cluster [34]. The fact that Ami BGCs were identified both in Gram-negative X. bovienii [33] and Gram-positive Bacillus [19,22] is particularly interesting. These clusters have different architectures and operate different self-resistance mechanisms. However, they encode the same low-molecular metabolite, representing an outstanding example of the convergent evolution of BGCs. The described probiotic activity of isolated B. pumilus strains together with the interspecial diversity of Ami clusters imply a high impact of Ami-producing strains on bacterial communities. The development of functional probiotics demands thorough characterization of their genotype and metabolomic profile. Bacillus species are common commercial probiotic products. However, particular probiotic strains may carry a latent threat in their genomes. That was reported for some B. cereus strains producing enterotoxins, which makes them unsafe for human use [27]. While homologs of Hbl and Nhe enterotoxins were not identified in the selected probiotic B. pumilus strains, their safety and impact on microbiomes are still to be determined precisely. The creation of designer probiotics with deleted toxins and transferred BGCs encoding microbiome reprogramming metabolites represents a new paradigm of probiotic development. We believe that ultrahigh-throughput isolation of natural probiotic strains from wildlife microbiomes, as well as their metabolic reprogramming, opens up a new avenue for pathogen control and microbiome remodeling in the food industry, agriculture, and healthcare.