Discussion The knowledge that colibactin induces prophages in diverse bacteria, combined with the finding that non-colibactin-producing bacteria from distinct environmental origins have functional clbS-like genes, leads us to speculate that colibactin production is more widespread than currently recognized, and that this genotoxin is likely to have evolved to target bacteria rather than a mammalian host. So far, studies of colibactin have primarily focused on its role in carcinogenesis, but this activity raises important questions with regard to the evolutionary role of the toxin for the producing bacterium. Colibactin genes have also been implicated in siderophore biosynthesis and microcin export, suggesting that these factors may collectively be involved in bacterial competition34,35. Although other functions of colibactin may exist, our discovery that it induces prophages provides one mechanism by which production of and immunity to this natural product might confer a competitive advantage over other microorganisms. For example, because cell lysis is an irreversible consequence of prophage induction22, this mechanism could explain a previously reported observation of pks-dependent growth inhibition of a subset of S. aureus strains, a bacterium with an evolutionary history shaped by phage activity17,36 (Supplementary Discussion). Moreover, the broad-spectrum activity of colibactin in inducing prophages across distinct bacteria suggests that this natural product could have effects on many members of a community, potentially accounting for colibactin-associated changes in the composition of the gut microbiome that have previously been observed in animal models16. Beyond bacteria, our observation that exposure to colibactin increases the production of Stx in mixed communities hints at mechanisms by which this natural product could affect host health and highlights how inducing prophages may regulate other behaviours within the microbial community. Our study underscores major gaps in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms that underlie prophage induction in microbiomes. MMC and ultraviolet light are the most common methods of activating prophage induction in the laboratory; however, the ecologically relevant triggers for prophages found in natural environments remain largely unidentified. Previous work has shown that the human gut commensal bacterium, Lactobacillus reuteri, harbours a prophage that undergoes induction during gastrointestinal transit in response to dietary fructose and short-chain fatty acids37. In the vaginal community, metabolism of benzo[a]pyrene—a constituent of tobacco smoke—and subsequent secretion in the vagina induces multiple Lactobacillus prophages38. In the nasal microbial community, hydrogen-peroxide-producing Streptococcus has been shown to selectively eliminate prophage-carrying S. aureus39. Unlike benzo[a]pyrene, which humans encounter through outside exposures, and hydrogen peroxide, which has a wide range of biological targets and proposed functions, colibactin is a complex natural product produced by human gut bacteria. By uncovering the phage-inducing activity of colibactin-producing bacteria, our findings reveal a previously unrecognized mechanism by which colibactin and potentially other DNA-damaging natural products may shape microbial communities. More generally, the modulation of phage behaviours represents a distinct and underappreciated ecological role for microbial natural products. Our findings add to this growing understanding14,40–43 and, notably, demonstrate phage induction by a natural product in co-culture. Finally, as links between the human gut virome and diseases continue to be established44, our findings set the stage for further investigations of how gut bacterial metabolite production modulates phage behaviours and may influence human disease.