4. Discussion IVM is primarily used as an anthelmintic in human and veterinary medicine. Previously, we reported its efficacy against S. aureus. Interestingly, among the many isolates investigated one isolate was resistant to the drug [4]. The growth curve analyses were in concert with the time-kill kinetics data as the O.D values did not increase beyond 12.5 μg/mL in O9 whereas the growth never stopped even when the concentration of IVM was increased up to 100 μg/mL for the resistant strain. The time-kill kinetics curves also showed inhibition of bacterial growth beyond 1× (MIC) in the sensitive strain whereas IVM was not able to inhibit bacterial growth in the resistant strain, even at the concentration of 100 μg/mL (Figure 1). Proteins that were only found in one of the samples did not present any fold change, as expected. Functional analysis revealed that most of the upregulated proteins had catalytic activity, followed by nucleotide ion binding, metal ion binding, DNA and RNA binding proteins. There were at least 354 proteins that were differentially expressed when compared between the two isolates (Figure 3). The group of 354 proteins that were upregulated have roles in cellular, metabolic, regulation, stimulus, localization, pumps, cytolysis, adhesion, and cytokinesis functions with the decreasing order in terms of numbers of proteins involved, respectively (Figure 4). Notably, the proteins MecA, BlaI, BlaZ, and UvrA which are involved in drug response were also differentially expressed. MecA targets unfolded and aggregated proteins to be recognized by proteolytic complexes. BlaZ, and BlaI are involved in the beta-lactam catabolic process, the latter is a transcriptional repressor, constitutively blocking the beta-lactamase gene. UvrA is part of the UvrABC complex that recognizes and processes the DNA lesions. Efflux pumps are one of the key resistance determinants involved in IVM resistance against different parasites, so they were the focus of this study (Figure 7). To this end, the expression of swrC increased in the resistant S. aureus O20 strain in this study. SwrC is encoded by the gene yerP and is involved in the efflux of many substrates, including surfactin, acriflavine, and ethidium bromide to name a few [29,30]. The swrC is also classified as a pathogenicity related gene in S. aureus [31,32] while in other bacteria, such as Bacillus subtilis, it is reported to be linked with motility of the bacteria [33]. Its higher expression in resistant strain of S. aureus suggests increase in tolerance of bacteria to different noxious agents. The emrB gene was also significantly higher in the O20 strain. This gene was found to be active in expulsion of many compounds, such as oxidative salicylic acid, 2,4-dinitrophenol (DNP), and carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP), out of the cell membrane [34]. Zhang et al. [35] reported emrB involvement in resistance of S. aureus to ampicillin antibiotic and found that emrB was upregulated 2.34-folds after treatment with ampicillin while after knockout the ampicillin resistance decreased by 0.60-folds. Similarly, mepA is another transporter that belongs to the multidrug and toxic compound extrusion (MATE) family [36] and the protein expression was significantly higher in the O20 strain. It is previously observed [37] that overexpression of mepA in S. aureus led to multi-drug resistance against several monovalent and divalent biocides and the fluoroquinolone antimicrobial agents norfloxacin and ciprofloxacin. These observations reflect that swrC, emrB, and mepA may have played a key role in resistance phenotype of S. aureus against IVM and its higher virulence. However, involvement of other proteins than efflux pumps as the resistance determinants needs to be further investigated. Recently, an analogue of IVM has also shown potent efficacy against biofilms produced by MRSA strains [38]. This study reiterates the importance for the use of IVM as an anti-staphylococcal agent. To this end, we investigated the differences between two clinical isolates of S. aureus and attribute these disparities towards the overexpression of efflux pumps (transporters). Interestingly, such resistance mechanisms have also been reported for IVM against different type of anthelmintics. For example, it is known that IVM is a good substrate of efflux pumps, such as ABC transporters and P-glycoproteins, in different parasites [39,40]. Thus, it might be possible to use different blocking agents to occupy the drug binding pockets of these efflux pumps/transporters/proteins to reverse IVM resistance. IVM is used at a dose rate of 150–200 μg/kg body weight in humans and animals and at this dose the Cmax achieved is 50 ng/mL [41]. Although the concentration of IVM required to kill the sensitive strain in this study (12.5 μg/mL) was higher than its therapeutic use, the reported lethal dose 50 (LD50) of IVM (50 mg/kg) suggests that it has a wide therapeutic index [42]. The data hint that the transporters may play a critical role and using agents that block these transporters might help in reversing IVM resistance to not only S. aureus but other microorganisms as well. However, this clearly requires further investigation and was beyond the scope of this study. Moreover, the drug safety data show that IVM has a wide therapeutic window and further investigation of reversal of IVM resistance using efflux pump inhibitors might be an appealing option [42]. The current study despite being comprehensive has some limitations as we did not include any standard strains of S. aureus. Furthermore, the concentrations of IVM used in the current study may not be achievable under field conditions. Nevertheless, the findings shed light on an interesting possible mode of resistance to IVM. To this end follow-up work is needed with more isolates where we look for a deeper analysis to monitor the whole genome for mutations or in-trans complementation of the transporters involved in IVM resistance against S. aureus standard and clinical isolates.