DISCUSSION In this study, we provide in vivo and in vitro characterization of Ecm16, a class IIa UvrA protein. Our data demonstrate that the expression of ecm16 is sufficient to confer echinomycin resistance to an otherwise echinomycin sensitive bacterium, E. coli K‐12. We show that ATP hydrolysis of Ecm16 is required for its ability to render resistance. Furthermore, Ecm16 was able to confer echinomycin resistance to host cells that are deficient in UvrA, UvrB, UvrC, or UvrD, indicating that Ecm16 does not depend on the NER machinery for its function. Finally, our data reveal that despite the sequence similarity between UvrA and Ecm16, they are unable to complement each other's function. Collectively, our data expand our current understanding of the various mechanism that class IIa UvrA proteins utilize for their function.Our work provides further insights into the potential mechanism used by Ecm16 to render resistance from echinomycin toxicity. In the case of NER, UvrA recognizes DNA lesions and promotes the recruitment of the rest of the NER system to excise the damaged DNA. However, Ecm16 retained its ability to render echinomycin resistance in the absence of any of the NER proteins. This observation posits two potential models where Ecm16 can either work with other housekeeping proteins found in E. coli or Ecm16 can work alone. The former model is plausible given that UvrA has been shown to work collaboratively with non‐NER proteins (Mazon et al., 2009; Tubbs et al., 2009). In the scenario where the latter model is correct, we envision Ecm16 to use ATP hydrolysis to restore the native DNA helix properties. UvrA has been proposed to subject DNA to a ‘stress test’ where UvrA unwinds and stretches (or compresses) DNA during the detection of damage (Yang, 2011). Ecm16 could be using a version of this ‘stress test’ mechanism but in doing that it would potentially release the echinomycin bound from DNA. We are currently testing between these two potential models. Based on primary sequence conservation, various drug‐producing bacteria have been proposed to encode UvrA class IIa proteins to counteract DNA intercalators (Ogawara, 2019). For example, daunorubicin and triostin A include a UvrA‐homolog encoding gene in their biosynthetic clusters: drrC and trsM (Furuya & Hutchinson, 1998; Keller et al., 2010; Ogawara, 2019; Praseuth et al., 2008; Watanabe et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2013). DrrC has been shown to render self‐protection in Streptomyces peucetius against daunorubicin (Moolenaar et al., 2000; Prija & Prasad, 2017). The production of doxorubicin increased ~5‐fold in a S. peucetius strain overexpressing drrC compared to that of the parental strain (Malla et al., 2010). Notably, the high degree of sequence similarity among class IIa UvrA proteins in drug‐producing bacteria suggest that Ecm16’s mechanism for self‐protection may be broadly conserved. However, the diversity of substrates in these class IIa UvrA proteins suggest that these proteins must include a mechanism for detecting specific substrates. Self‐protection UvrA class IIa proteins may also share substrates. For example, Streptomyces triostinicus encoding the biosynthetic cluster for triostin A was shown to produce not only triostin A but also echinomycin (Praseuth et al., 2008), suggesting that TrsM protected S. triostinicus from both drugs. More research is necessary to understand how these various UvrA class IIa proteins recognize their distinct substrates and to determine whether their mechanisms of action are conserved. Although multiple models have been proposed to explain how the NER system recognizes DNA damage, conclusively addressing the mechanism of recognition remains a major gap in our knowledge in both bacterial and eukaryotic NER systems. We propose that the understanding of the mechanism of substrate recognition by Ecm16 can provide insights into how the NER system recognizes its substrates. This is especially the case given that UvrA and Ecm16 were unable to promote each other's function. UvrA has been proposed to distinguish between native and damaged DNA by sensing changes in various properties of DNA (structural, electrostatic, dynamics, stability, flexibility) (Kraithong et al., 2021). Our data revealed that class I UvrA is unable to render echinomycin resistance possibly because the distortions of DNA caused by echinomycin are not recognized by UvrA. This scenario would be surprising given the wide range of DNA distortions that class I UvrA proteins are known to recognize. Another scenario is that the NER system is unable to repair any potential DNA damage caused by echinomycin toxicity. Regardless of which mechanism is at play, figuring out why class I UvrA proteins are unable to render resistance against echinomycin has the potential to advance our understanding of the mechanisms of the universally conserved NER system.