Discussion Edeines are natural nonribosomal peptides with antibacterial, antifungal, and antitumor activities (Johnson et al., 2020). Edeines are produced by B. brevis under appropriate condition, however, only a few reports focusing on the molecular pathway and regulatory factors involved in edeine production in B. brevis. Westman first identified the edeine biosynthetic gene cluster in B. brevis Vm4, and confirmed that edeQ was a resistance gene. Heterologous expression of edeQ enhanced resistance of edeines in Bacillus subtilis (Westman et al., 2013). In addition, Zhang et al. reported that AbrB downregulated the biosynthesis of edeines in B. brevis X23, and abrB knockout improved the yield of edeines (Zhang et al., 2020). Currently, our understanding of the molecular pathway and regulation of edeine biosynthesis is still limited. In this study, we identified that the regulatory gene edeB on ede BGC was involved in edeine biosynthesis of B. brevis X23. Bioinformatics analysis showed that EdeB protein is a member of the ParB family, which are plasmid active distribution proteins involved in the distribution of plasmids and chromosomes, as well as embodying DNA-binding activity (Jalal et al., 2020). Recent studies have shown that many ParB family proteins functioned as transcription factors in numerous biological processes (Khare et al., 2004). In addition, EdeB protein contains a typical HTH domain, which can bind with DNA, suggesting that EdeB protein plays a regulatory role in transcription (Kusiak1 et al., 2011). While ParB family proteins are common in Bacillus, their role in the regulation of antibiotic biosynthesis has not been clearly studied (Webb et al., 2010). SbnI, a protein of the ParB superfamily, is a heme-inducible transcriptional regulator involved in Staphyloferrin B (SB) production (Laakso et al., 2016). SbnI also exhibited enzymatic function in SB biosynthesis (Skaar et al., 2004). It has been shown that Glu20 and Asp58 were required for the kinase activity of SbnI (Verstraete et al., 2018). The N-terminal of EdeB protein contains a SnbI_like domain, suggesting that it may has similar function as SnbI. The important role of gene edeB in the edeine biosynthesis was confirmed by edeB knockout and complementation experiments. The inhibition zone of B. brevis strain with edeB knockout significantly smaller, and the antibacterial activity was significantly reduced compared with the wild-type B. brevis strain X23. Gene edeB complementation restored and improved its antibacterial ability. HPLC-MS results showed that edeB knockout reduced edeine production by 18%, but edeB complementation increased edeine production by 20.43%. Taken together, these results suggest that edeB was essential for edeine biosynthesis by upregulating edeine production. The expression of edeA, edeQ, and edeK on ede BGC was analyzed by RT-qPCR. The results showed that the expression of these three genes were significantly reduced in edeB-deletion mutant. The genes with decreased transcription were involved in antibiotic transport, core skeleton formation, and resistance in edeine biosynthesis. Reduced transcription of these genes may be regulated by EdeB, which is consistent with decreased production of edeines in edeB-deletion mutant, suggesting that edeB is a positive regulator in the biosynthesis of edeines. EMSA analysis showed that EdeB could directly bound to the promoter region of ede BGC. Based on the direct interaction between EdeB and edePro, and edeB deletion and complementation experiments discussed above, we propose a molecular mechanism underlying the regulatory role of EdeB in edeine biosynthesis. EdeB upregulates the expression of the genes on ede BGC to improve the production of edeines through binding to the promoter region of ede BGC. However, whether other proteins are involved in this process or interact with EdeB is still not known. In summary, EdeB is a major component in edeine biosynthesis. Overexpressing edeB can significantly improve edeine production in B. brevis, which may have wide applications in medicine and agriculture.