3. Discussion Human cell lines are excellent in vitro models for high-throughput toxicity screening. Caco-2 cells feature many characteristics of the intestinal epithelial cells, used as an alternative model to study epithelial-cell invasion and most commonly used to assess toxicity [37,38]. The hepatoma cell line, HepG2, morphologically resembles hepatocytes in addition to its ability to retain many of the enzymes involved in xenobiotic metabolism [39]. Therefore, both cell lines were chosen to investigate the effect of FB1 and AFB1 on the bioenergetic status of the intestine and liver. Our study shows that toxins impact cell bioenergetics and their ability to cope with extra stress and energy demands, and that effect is toxin and cell type specific. Under our tested conditions, the obtained results clearly demonstrate that FB1 and AFB1 have powerful cytotoxic properties towards Caco-2 and HepG2 cells. We found that the results of the SRB assay were lower than the MTT assay after FB1 and AFB1 exposure to both cells. The MTT, measuring metabolically active cells, and SRB assay, measuring the protein content of both live and dead adhered cells, are combined to assess whether MTT decreases are due to the presence of less cells (anti-proliferative) or to the inhibition of the mitochondrial respiration. In some cases, the MTT values are higher than the SRB values, which may be due to protein losses or over reactivity. It is indeed reported in the literature that there is a delay time between MTT and SRB, resulting in the SRB assay having a 20%–50% lower IC50 value than the MTT assay in short-term cultures [40]. In our study, higher concentrations of FB1 are required to kill half of the cells within 24 h of exposure, while much lower concentrations, in case of longer time of exposure (i.e., 48 h and 72 h), can have the same toxic effect as in 24 h (Table 1). This is in accordance with previous results reported by Wentzel et al., who showed that there is no drastically negative impact on the Caco-2 or HepG2 viability after short-term (24 h) exposure to FB1 at concentrations between 32.1 and 10.7 µg/mL [41]. Furthermore, Cetin and Bullerman have shown that the IC50 values for FB1 in Caco2 and HepG2 are more than 100 µg/mL for the exposure times of 48 h and 72 h, however, they did not mention the exact concentrations applied in the MTT assay [42]. Du et al. have shown that the IC50 value is 343.9 µg/mL after FB1 exposure in HepG2 cells for 24 h by SRB assay [43], which is similar to our results (Table 1). For AFB1, previous works reported the IC50 values in Caco-2 cells (20.4 µg/mL, 19.7 µg/mL and 19.2 µg/mL for the exposure times of 24 h, 48 h and 72 h, respectively) [30,44], which are lower than our results (Table 1). There was no difference in the IC50 values in the three exposure times, which is also the same observation as in our MTT assay (48.0 µg/mL, 52.3 µg/mL and 59.3 µg/mL for the exposure times of 24 h, 48 h and 72 h, respectively). However, in SRB assay, all the AFB1-tested concentrations have reduced the cell viability in a time-dependent manner. It could be that SRB measures protein content of both live and dead cells, whereas MTT only measures live cells. This is the reason why the adhered cells are mostly dead, but are not detached yet. It is worth mentioning that the cell density (6000 cells/well) in the previous works was lower than the cell density used in our experimental setup (20,000 cells/well). The MTT-based IC50 value for HepG2 viability after 24 h of exposure was reported before to be 31.25 µg/mL [45], which is half the concentration in our experiment. Furthermore, Liu et al. and Du et al. indicated that the IC50 values after 24 h of exposure in HepG2 cells were 6.8 µg/mL and 3.8 µg/mL using SRB assay, respectively, which are much lower than the IC50 values in our work [43,46]. Similarly, in MTT, in their studies, the cell density (6000 cells/well and 10,000 cells/well, respectively) was also lower than that used in our experiment (20,000 cells/well). Overall, we may conclude that the seeding density of the cells is an important determinant in the determination of IC50 values, which may affect the toxin load per cell and create different ratios of cell populations composed by healthy, damaged and dead cells. Especially, the population of the non-lethally damaged cells may induce a wide variety of cell defense, repair and even apoptosis mechanisms in an attempt to limit tissue damage as much as possible. Amongst these defense systems, bioenergetic shifts are commonly described [47]. Mitochondria plays integral roles in energy production, calcium ions (Ca2+) and redox homeostasis, as well as regulation of apoptosis [48]. Moreover, emerging evidence also shows that mitochondria are important molecular targets for FB1 and AFB1 [19,24,49]. To investigate the possible toxic effect of FB1 and AFB1 on mitochondrial respiration, we have used the state-of-the-art Agilent Seahorse XF24 Analyzer “Extra-cellular Flux Analysis” to determine the real-time kinetic response of Caco-2 and HepG2 cells. This was indicated through evaluating six fundamental parameters of mitochondrial function: basal respiration, maximal respiration, ATP production, proton leak, non-mitochondrial respiration and spare respiratory capacity. The basal respiration after sequential injection of oligomycin, carbonyl-cyanide-4-(trifluoromethoxy) phenylhydrazine (FCCP) and rotenone + antimycin A is depicted in Figure 8. The Agilent Seahorse XF Cell Mito Stress Test kit is based on the electron transport chain (ETC), which indicates the target of action for all the modulators. Oligomycin inhibits ATP synthase (complex V) and impacts or decreases electron flow through the ETC, resulting in a reduction in mitochondrial respiration or OCR. This decrease in the OCR is linked to the cellular ATP production. FCCP is an uncoupling agent that collapses the proton gradient and disrupts the mitochondrial membrane potential. As a result, electron flow through the ETC is uninhibited, and oxygen consumption by complex IV reaches the maximum. The FCCP-stimulated OCR can then be used to calculate spare respiratory capacity, defined as the difference between maximal respiration and basal respiration. As a consequence, OCR expressed in pMoles/min enables drawing conclusions about the ability to synthesize ATP and about mitochondrial function, even better than the measurements of intermediates (such as ATP or nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide NADH) and potentials [50,51]. In our study, the two exposure times (24 h and 48 h) for FB1 and AFB1 in both Caco-2 and HepG2 cells were considered to investigate the effects of the two toxins on the mitochondrial respiration as the differences in the IC50 values were significant, which was not the case for 48 h and 72 h of treatment. Decleer et al. found that the mitochondrial respiration could be barely observed with the Seahorse XF Cell Mito Stress Test when they used the same toxic doses of cereulide toxin, which corresponds to the IC50 values from the MTT and SRB assays [52]. Therefore, we applied lower toxic doses in our experiment to give a higher rate of cell viability, and these doses correspond to 65%, 75%, 85% and 95% of cell viability. The effect of FB1 on mitochondrial respiration was investigated upon 24 h and 48 h treatment of Caco-2 and HepG2 cells by assessing six fundamental parameters of mitochondrial function: basal respiration, maximal respiration, ATP production, proton leak, non-mitochondrial respiration and spare respiratory capacity. In HepG2 cells, the basal respiration significantly increased exposure to the lower concentration (1 µg/mL) over 24 h, while this did not happen in the case of other treatments. This may indicate that under the lower stress of FB1, HepG2 cells could be stimulated to improve the energetic demand in 24 h. A possible explanation for this observation is that HepG2 cells produce more ATP in an attempt to overcome the stress to achieve self-resistance. Loiseau et al. have also stated that basal respiration and FCCP-uncoupled respiration increased significantly in HepG2 treated cells with the low concentration of chloroethyl nitrosourea, suggesting that the treated cells used up a part of their respiratory ‘reserve’ that could be a survival advantage [53]. This is in agreement with the fact that the lower dose of FB1 could affect HepG2 cells to improve the energetic demand to finish the reserve during the mitochondrial respiration. In addition, when cells are exposed to higher doses of FB1, basal respiration was still inhibited in Caco-2 and HepG2 cells. Domijan and Abramov stated that FB1 significantly reduced basal oxygen consumption and led to a decrease in the rate of mitochondrial and cellular respiration [24]. It is possible that FB1 suppresses mitochondrial ETC complexes and breaks the balance of H+ transfer between the mitochondrial inner membrane and mitochondrial matrix, which blocks mitochondrial ATP synthesis. Maximal respiration and ATP production are the sensitive parameters for determination of the mitochondrial dysfunction [51]. In our results, there is a significant decrease in all treatments’ exposure to the highest concentration of FB1 in Caco-2 and HepG2 cells, which is consistent to the parameter change in ATP production. It is shown that under the exposure to FB1, the energy demand of both cells is increased due to more ATP required to maintain cellular functions. Therefore, the decrease in maximal respiration and ATP production illustrated that FB1 could cause mitochondrial dysfunction for both cell types. The impact of FB1 on mitochondrial ATP synthase that also translocated protons across the inner membrane has been best observed after the addition of oligomycin. The presence of oligomycin during the estimation of maximal respiration is important to prevent the reverse activity of ATP synthase with rapid intracellular ATP depletion, which may lead to cellular metabolic dysfunction and death [51]. The proton leak was unaffected in both cells over 24 h, and it hypothesizes that FB1 does not cause mitochondrial damage with the chosen FB1 concentrations in our experiment. However, all the applied FB1 concentrations in both Caco-2 and HepG2 cells for 48 h significantly lowered the proton leak in comparison with the untreated control (Figure 3 and Figure 5). During the mitochondrial respiration, the protonmotive force generated during substrate oxidation is not used exclusively to drive ATP synthesis. Some protons “leak” back across the mitochondrial inner membrane, constantly consuming the membrane potential and stimulating activity of the respiratory chain to maintain it, and a high leak may indicate mitochondrial injury [54]. Our results suggest that mitochondrial dysfunctions in FB1 pathogenesis are caused not by proton leak, but maybe by respiratory chain defects, because upon a more prolonged time of FB1 exposure (48 h), the mitochondria failed to regulate ATP production. There was no significant decrease in non-mitochondrial respiration and spare respiratory capacity upon FB1 treatment in both cell types. Non-mitochondrial respiration means that oxygen consumption persists due to a subset of cellular enzymes that continue to consume oxygen after the addition of rotenone and antimycin A. In our study, non-mitochondrial respiration did not change (Figure 3 and Figure 5), which illustrates that our results are an accurate measure of mitochondrial respiration based on the same level of OCR. Spare respiratory capacity was impaired indicating an affected ability of the exposed cells to cope with a sudden increased need for ATP, which is given by the difference between maximal and basal cellular OCR. A cell with a larger spare respiratory capacity can produce more ATP and overcome more stress, including oxidative stress, which indicates that this is estimative of the cell’s ability to cope with large increases in ATP turnover. For Caco-2 cells, FB1 could increase the spare respiratory capacity after 24 h of exposure when Caco-2 cells’ viability was 95%, 85% and 75%. It is hypothesized that the exposure to FB1 over 24 h possibly exerts a positive effect on the ability of Caco-2 cells to cope with the stress in 24 h, while, with a more prolonged time of exposure (48 h) to FB1 or the highest dose of FB1 (400 µg/mL) after 24 h of exposure, cells could lose the ability to cope with a sudden increased need for ATP. For HepG2 cells, the short-term exposure to FB1 possibly exerts negative effects on the ability of cells to cope with stresses (including oxidative stress) in HepG2 cells within 48 h, but it is not obviously observed according to that spare respiratory capacity. It was reported that in HepG2 cells, FB1 upregulated the genes responsive to oxidative stress along with an elevated antioxidant response being mounted [19]. A previous study also stated that spare respiratory capacity levels are critically regulated by cellular signals coming from inside and outside mitochondria, and numerous complimentary signals converge to regulate spare respiratory capacity levels [55]. Those that modify the efficiency of the mitochondrial substrates are involved in short-term mitochondrial plasticity, whereas variations in mitochondrial biogenesis are considered long-term regulators. The effect of AFB1 on mitochondrial respiration was also exposed for 24 h and 48 h in Caco-2 and HepG2 cells and was indicated through evaluating six fundamental parameters of mitochondrial function. Surprisingly, a low dose of AFB1 (2.5 µg/mL and 1 µg/mL) stimulated the OCR to increase in both cells over 24 h of exposure, which is observed in basal respiration, maximum respiration and ATP production (Figure 4 and Figure 6), while these parameters were significantly inhibited at the same dose in the case of 48 h of exposure. It means that the presence of lower concentrations of AFB1 could stimulate cells to improve the energetic demand in 24 h, while after 48 h exposure, the baseline conditions and basal oxygen consumption were inhibited, resulting in metabolic dysfunction. The significant decrease in maximum respiration and ATP production exposure to AFB1 in both cells over 24 h and 48 h means that ATP synthase or complex IV or V could be inhibited, which may lead to cellular metabolic dysfunction and death. It is hypothesized that AFB1 could negatively affect the complex IV or complex V, and the balance of transferring H+ between the mitochondrial inner membrane and mitochondrial matrix was broken. As a consequence, because of the presence of AFB1, cells cannot provide enough H+ to synthesize ATP resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction. Previous works also reported that AFB1 decreased the activities of mitochondrial ETC complexes IV and V to disrupt mitochondrial function and ATP production in the liver [56,57,58]. These pieces of evidence are similar to our results, demonstrating that AFB1 could suppress mitochondrial ETC complexes IV or V and block cells’ energy metabolism in the mitochondrial respiration, thus causing mitochondrial dysfunction. The proton leak significantly decreased in the highest concentration of all the applied AFB1 in Caco-2 cells and HepG2 cells over 48 h (Figure 4 and Figure 6), while there is no increase in the proton leak with all treatments. It demonstrates that AFB1 could induce ROS in both cells [59], but not by inducing the proton leak. The high water solubility of AFB1 (range of 11–33 ppm) is likely the reason, since high water solubility makes it different to diffuse into the cell membranes [60]. Sterigmatocystin (ST), and AFB1-structurally similar mycotoxin with a bisdihydrofuran moiety, has similar toxicity to AFB1. ST, with the low water solubility, is more toxic than AFB1 to HepG2 cells. Therefore, it is likely the reason, since low water solubility makes it easy to diffuse into the cells, and the same logic holds for every biological membrane, including that of mitochondria [46]. However, the decrease in proton leak proves that the long-term exposure of AFB1 could lead to the functional decline in cell functionality [61]. The mitochondrial mechanism is important to regulate the mitochondria to produce ATP production, so in Caco-2 cells, ATP decreased much more than in HepG2 cells. Similar to the effect of FB1, there is no significant difference in non-mitochondrial respiration with the exposure to AFB1 over 24 h and 48 h in both cells, except at the highest dose (Figure 4 and Figure 6). That means our results can obtain an accurate measure of mitochondrial respiration based on the same level of OCR. HepG2 cells exposed to AFB1 over 24 h or 48 h showed no significant difference in the spare respiratory capacity, whereas the latter is significantly decreased in Caco-2 cells after 48 h, thereby indicating that the spare respiratory capacity may depend on the cell type. It has been observed that hepatocytes only use approximately 30% of their maximal respiratory capacity to maintain basal respiration [62]. It was observed that there is no significant difference in Caco-2 and HepG2 cells after exposure to AFB1 over 24 h and 48 h. This means that cells have complex mechanisms capable of controlling mitochondrial quality and quantity, such as mitochondrial homeostasis. Marchetti et al. also stated that mitochondrial homeostasis is ensured through coordinated processes, including mitochondrial biogenesis, and these mitochondrial quality control mechanisms regulate spare respiratory capacity levels and ATP transfer [55]. However, AFB1 can still let both Caco-2 and HepG2 cells lose their ability to resist the stress (oxidative stress), and the mitochondrial respiration is disrupted with longer exposure time, as oxidative stress is one of the mechanisms of AFB1-induced cytotoxicity [63]. However, spare respiratory capacity levels are strictly dependent on the cellular context and may not always be observed, or low spare respiratory capacity levels do not always mean mitochondrial dysfunction [55]. Previous studies have also stated that continuous exposure to AFB1 might bring a sustained disturbance in the mitochondrial oxygen consumption that is capable of imparting damage to the mitochondrial membrane, resulting in altered respiratory capacity [57]. It is interesting to highlight the mitochondrial toxicity of AFB1 in case of chronic exposure. It is known that when cells are subjected to stress, energy demand increases when more ATP is required to maintain cellular functions. In addition, AFB1 could still cause mitochondria dysfunction based on the negative effect of mitochondrial oxygen consumption and all mitochondrial parameters. The mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) generated by proton pumps (complex I, III and IV) is an essential component in the process of energy storage during oxidative phosphorylation [64]. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) encompass several primary reactive species including superoxide anion (O2−), hydroxyl radical (OH), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and singlet oxygen (1O2) [65]. Incomplete electron transfer through ETC complexes I and II results in O2− production in the mitochondrial matrix, while electron leak at complex III generates O2− in both matrix and intermembrane space [66]. Our results show that FB1 and AFB1 could significantly disrupt the MMP and induce ROS production when FB1 was 400 µg/mL and 25 µg/mL and AFB1 was 25 µg/mL and 15 µg/mL in Caco-2 and HepG2 cells at the same time, respectively. Previous studies have demonstrated that the integrity of mitochondria (MMP and ROS) that is the central component of cell apoptosis is disrupted by FB1 and AFB1 [35,46,67], which is consistent with our results. MMP itself is controlled by electron transport and proton leaks [68]. It is hypothesized that the MMP decrease could be mainly induced by FB1 and AFB1 disrupting electron transport because there is no significant difference in proton leak (Figure 3, Figure 4, Figure 5 and Figure 6). With a decrease in MMP by FB1 and AFB1, the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (PTP) opens, solutes (K+, Mg2+, and Ca2+ ions) and water enter, leading to the swelling of the mitochondrial matrix, rupturing of the outer membrane and subsequent leakage of mitochondrial proteins [69]. Moreover, increased ROS production in mitochondria has been reported upon activation of the PTP, despite the requisite mitochondrial uncoupling [70]. It has been suggested that PTP opening (triggered by Ca2+) induces a specific conformational change in complex I and complex III, and it may also inhibit the electron pathway inside complex I and complex III [66]. Finally, Ca2+ overload by the MMP decrease can lead to inducing the ROS production and inhibiting the ATP synthesis, resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death. Indeed, our seahorse results show that when Caco-2 and HepG2 cells were exposed to FB1 (400 µg/mL and 25 µg/mL) and AFB1 (25 µg/mL and 15 µg/mL) for 24 h, ATP production was significantly inhibited. It may demonstrate that FB1 and AFB1 could disrupt the ETC to induce mitochondrial dysfunction.