DISCUSSION Microbial reservoirs in pristine environments, with little to no impact from anthropogenic selection pressures, provide the opportunity to investigate the natural propensity and linked evolutionary origins of AMR. Here, by leveraging metagenomics on twenty-one epilithic biofilms, we assessed the resistomes of eight individual GFS epilithic biofilms. To date, while many studies have looked for novel antibiotics and resistance genes in pristine environments such as the deep sea (31) or the polar regions (32), few have explored the full diversity of antibiotic resistance in such environments (33, 34). Van Goethem et al. (35) identified 117 naturally occurring ARGs associated with multidrug, aminoglycosidem and beta-lactam resistance in pristine Antarctic soils (17). Similarly, D’Costa et al. (4) identified a collection of ARGs encoding resistance to beta-lactams as well as tetracyclines and glycopeptides in 30,000-year-old Beringian permafrost sediments. In agreement with these previous studies, we identified 29 AMR categories, including the previously mentioned resistance categories, in the studied biofilm communities. Among these, the highest ARG abundance was associated with aminoglycoside and beta-lactam resistance. Our study further suggests that although the overall abundance differs, the epilithic resistome was highly similar in all GFSs, independent of origin (i.e., New Zealand or Russia). Furthermore, our results agree with the results obtained in other resistomes identified in pristine environments such as Antarctic soils and permafrost in terms of the identified ARGs. Unlike previous studies, where ARGs were primarily associated with bacteria, we report for the first time that AMR was associated with both bacteria and eukaryotes in various abundances in environmental samples, including GFSs. A previous study by Brown et al. (36) reported that the IRS-HR (isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase—high resistance) type gene conferring resistance against mupirocin was identified in Staphylococcus aureus. More importantly, they suggested that horizontal gene transfer led to the acquisition of IRS-HR genes by bacteria from eukaryotes (36). Despite these early reports, the contribution of eukaryotes to most resistomes, including from pristine environments, has largely been unexplored thus far. An exception to this was the report by Fairlamb et al. (37), who identified eukaryotic drug resistance, especially encoded by fungi (Candida and Aspergillus) and parasites (Plasmodium and Trypanosoma). However, most of these modes of resistance were highly specific toward particular drug treatments (37). Our results specifically revealed that taxa from the phylum Ochrophyta encoded resistance to 28 AMR categories, and this was also reflected in other (micro-)eukaryotes. Interestingly, phylogenetic analyses revealed shared homology between the ARGs from the GFSs compared to reference databases. There were also other ARGs that formed separate clades indicating that they may either be distantly related or previously unidentified resistance genes. While going beyond the scope of the present study, the distantly related ARGs would need to be experimentally validated as performed in previous studies on phage-borne ARGs (38) and novel ARGs (24). Importantly, dinoflagellates are known to produce biologically active natural compounds that have been implicated in ecological roles and thus have been targeted in bioprospecting drives (39). However, although the anti-inflammatory (40) and vasoconstrictive (41) activities of dinoflagellate-derived biomolecules have been well-defined, dinoflagellate-encoded BGCs have been largely unknown. It must be noted that our analyses provide insights on the functional potential of the identified ARGs, within both pro- and eukaryotes. Substantial additional wet-lab experiments are required to validate the function of the identified ARGs, especially within the identified eukaryotic genomes. Apart from encoded resistance mechanisms, microalgae such as Ochrophyta have been of interest as a source of (new) antimicrobial compounds (42, 43). Martins et al. reported that extracts from different microalgae may potentially serve not only as antimicrobial agents, but also as anticancer therapeutics. However, our present results suggest that these taxa may also serve as environmental reservoirs for AMR itself. It is however presently unclear whether this phenomenon confers advantages with respect to niche occupation and protection against bacterial infection as well as whether the eukaryotes are sensitive to the antibiotics produced by them. Our attempts at trying to elucidate putative or potential functions using tools such as fARGene and through databases such as UniProtKB were unsuccessful. Although we found partial homology of the eukaryote-encoded TETA genes to those found in UniProtKB (141 to 159 aa), it is unclear whether the homologous regions represent an active site and/or the expression of the ARG. This circumstance further highlights the lack of sufficient knowledge highlighting the need for additional wet-lab validations of our findings. Studies delving into the origins of AMR have reported that fecal pollution may explain ARG abundances in anthropogenically impacted environments (44). This phenomenon was also observed by Antelo et al. (45) and others (46) who detected ARGs in soils in Antarctica, especially in proximity to scientific bases. A similar trend manifested in our analyses, where quinolone (synthetic antibiotic) resistance was found in the glacier streams from the Southern Alps. Interestingly, we observed that the quinolone resistance was higher in a glacier that was accessible to hikers along the Cascade Saddle, a famous trekking hot spot. This observation is along the lines of a recent report by Hwengwere et al. suggesting that the concentrations of anthropogenically derived ARGs are greater in regions closer to the research stations in Antarctica (17). Although it is plausible that some of the GFSs sampled in our study may indeed be under anthropogenic influence, albeit minimal, the majority of them are considered to be pristine environments. In this context, AMR is likely derived from natural antibiotics produced by microorganisms as a competitive advantage given the oligotrophic conditions. Microorganisms acquire resistance either as a protective measure against other microorganisms (47, 48) or as a self-defense mechanism to prevent inadvertent suicide by damaging metabolites (14). Accordingly, we found both antibiotic biosynthesis pathways and BGCs within the epilithic resistomes. We identified pathways for the biosynthesis of glycopeptides, beta-lactams, and aminoglycosides, among others, concurrent with the high abundance of ARGs against said antibiotics. Additionally, we identified BGCs with a predicted antibacterial function in both eukaryotes and bacteria. While a limited number of studies such, as Waschulin et al. (49) and Liao et al. (50), have shown BGCs in pristine environments, none of these studies have contextualized the cooccurrence of BGCs with AMR. Hence, we not only found that most of our MAGs contain BGCs, of which many have an antibacterial function, but also found all MAGs to encode multiple resistance genes. Additionally, we found several BGCs closely localized to ARGs on the same contig, thereby indicating an immediate self-defense mechanism against the encoded secondary metabolites. This agrees with the resistance hypothesis highlighted by Tran et al. stating that a gene conferring resistance to potentially harmful metabolites produced by the organism is to be found within the BGC-encoding operons (14). We also observed that the recently identified CPR bacteria (51) (in our case, phylum Patescibacteria) not only encoded AMR but also harbored genes associated with the production of molecules with antibacterial effects. Although Patescibacteria have been identified in oligotrophic environments (52, 53) with carbon and/or nutrient limitations similar to those observed for GFSs, it is plausible that their ability to survive with minimal biosynthetic and metabolic pathways may indeed depend on the expression of BGCs and AMR. At the time of this writing, a preprint by Maatouk et al. (54), described the presence of ARGs across publicly available CPR bacterial genomes. In addition, we report the identification of AMR within GFS-derived CPR genomes, likely as a means of competitive inhibition against other taxa. Alternatively, biofilms may also allow for collective resistance, tolerance, and exposure protection to antibacterial compounds (55). The AMR and BGCs encoded by most phyla may therefore affect cooperation and/or interactions associated with nutrient exchange, leading to the privatization of public goods (55). Such a phenomenon may be achieved due to the competition within taxa, both at the intra- and interspecies levels, via secretion of toxins (48) and occupying spatial niches (56, 57) thereafter. Furthermore, Stubbendieck and Straight previously highlighted the multifaceted effects of bacterial competition which include the potential taxation and subsequent increase in bacterial fitness (58). Thus, the in-situ competition within multispecies biofilms may allow for cross-phyla and cross-domain interactions while simultaneously increasing the overall fitness of the endogenous epilithic microbial community. Alternatively, these interactions or lack thereof may shape the overall community, including spatial organization (59), especially in energy-limited systems such as the GFSs. Conclusions. Epilithic biofilms are an integral and key mode of survival in the extreme environment of glacier-fed streams. Herein, we report that these biofilms provide critical insights into the naturally occurring resistome. Our findings shed light on the survival mechanisms via the resistome, including potential ecological dimensions of ARGs and BGCs within the GFS microbial communities. Furthermore, we reveal the congruence of genes encoding both BGCs and AMR, in both bacteria and eukaryotes. More importantly, we highlight for the first time the comprehensive AMR profile of CPR bacteria and of (micro-)eukaryotes. Collectively, our results highlight underlying resistance mechanisms, including BGCs, employed in “biological warfare” in oligotrophic and challenging glacier-fed stream ecosystems.