Discussion Leveraging our understanding of colibactin biosynthesis, we developed a panel of compounds that can potently and specifically inhibit the colibactin-activating peptidase ClbP. Past observations that ClbP recognizes a structural motif not commonly found in other metabolites made it well-suited for substrate-guided inhibitor design. Notably, none of the inhibitors tested here show substantial differences in activity in vitro, despite bearing different N-acyl structures. This may indicate that the acyl group serves only a weak role in initial substrate recognition, while potency is driven by the reversible covalent bond formed between ClbP’s catalytic serine residue and the boronic acid electrophile. Distinguishing which features are essential for potency and recognition will aid future medicinal chemistry efforts, as well as the design of other chemical tools with additional chemical functionality in the acyl group of the molecule. In addition to their high potency for ClbP inhibition, these compounds do not appear to interact with any of the other serine hydrolases examined in our assays. A potential risk of using electrophilic inhibitors is that their high potency and slow off-rates will lead to inhibition of many cellular targets. We surveyed a broad range of potential secondary targets, including PBPs in the same β-lactamase family as ClbP, using ABPP assays and did not observe evidence of off-target activity. Metabolomics experiments illustrate that treatment with these compounds does not broadly change metabolism outside of the colibactin biosynthetic pathway. Examining additional aspects of inhibitor selectivity would be aided by the preparation of chemical tools based on 1–4 which can form irreversible covalent bonds with ClbP and other potential targets. However, the fact that these compounds show limited toxicity to various organisms, including bacteria and mammalian cells, and minimal metabolic perturbation outside of the colibactin pathway are strong evidence that their off-target effects are low. One of the most promising aspects of these inhibitors is the opportunity they provide to study colibactin’s effects in the context of a complex pks+ community. We show that 3 can selectively block colibactin biosynthesis in E. coli NC101 in the presence of a complex gut community without antibiotic activity toward representatives of major gut bacterial phyla. These experiments also showed that baseline production of the prodrug scaffold is more than tenfold lower when pks+
E. coli are present in low abundance in a community setting versus in monoculture. This dramatic difference is a reminder that studies in which germ-free mice are monocolonized with pks+ bacteria cannot offer a complete picture of colibactin’s impacts in a community context. Small molecule tools like 3 will enable studies to determine whether observations from monocolonization studies can be reproduced in conventional hosts with pks+ communities. Finally, we confirmed that, in addition to blocking the formation of key metabolites like the prodrug scaffold, 3 can also prevent the genotoxic effects of colibactin on human cells. Treatment with 3 prevents cell-cycle arrest, DNA adduct formation and FANCD2 ubiquitination, biomarkers widely used to monitor colibactin’s genotoxicity11,12,15. A major challenge to studying colibactin has been the inability to establish precise control over colibactin exposure, limiting our ability to establish clear, causal connections between this unique toxin and the changes in the host which have been attributed to its activity. Our inhibitors can address this problem and allow us to dissect colibactin’s role in cancer with a new level of detail. These chemical tools can also be applied beyond the context of colibactin and the gut microbiota. The family of prodrug-activating peptidases related to ClbP is highly selective in substrate scope and widely distributed in biosynthetic gene clusters from environmental bacteria46. We showed that our inhibitors can selectively disrupt production of both zwittermicin and the edeines. These experiments allowed us to uncover the biosynthetic intermediate ‘prezwittermicin’, which had only been predicted based on the biosynthetic gene cluster. Moreover, we provide the first experimental observation, to our knowledge, of preedeine metabolites, directly demonstrating how targeted small molecule inhibitors can be used for natural product discovery. We envision the general strategy of combining metabolomics analysis with inhibitors of biosynthetic enzymes may be applied more broadly to enable studies of natural products which are difficult to isolate, synthesize, or study with genetic tools. Chemical modulation of gut microbial functions is a promising avenue both for therapeutic intervention and enabling basic research into the mechanisms of microbiota-host interactions47–49. Applying this strategy to colibactin biosynthesis offers a new way to interrogate the relationships between this enigmatic natural product, the surrounding microbiota, their host and cancer. Using inhibitors like 3, we can begin to understand how the duration and timing of colibactin exposure influence tumorigenesis. These inhibitors may also help illuminate the connection between colibactin and inflammation, which can be intermittent in the gut, but is essential for colibactin-related CRC in mouse models. In the long term, these molecules may serve as a starting point to evaluate colibactin biosynthesis as a therapeutic target for the prevention or treatment of CRC.