4. Discussion Since studies have described that surfactin molecules are able to integrate into lipid bilayers, leading to membrane destabilisation, pore formation and chelation [19,20,21], it has been generally assumed that surfactin possesses antimicrobial properties [15,69]. In order to analyse a negative effect of surfactin on microbial cell growth, different established laboratoy bacterial strains, namely B. subtilis (native surfactin producer and Gram-positive model strain), C. glutamicum (biotechnologically established production strain), E. coli (Gram-negative model strain) and P. putida (biotechnologically established rhamnolipid production strain), were used in surfactin shock experiments. Remarkably, the addition of surfactin produced by B. subtilis (KANEKA, Osaka, Japan) in concentrations of up to 100 g/L showed absolutely no or only minor effects on the respective cell growth of tested strains. With a reduction in OD600 values of 22 and 17%, respectively, E. coli and B. subtilis showed the greatest effects, while no considerable influence could be detected against C. glutamicum and P. putida. This raises the question of the antibacterial efficiency of surfactin. Several studies have described antimicrobial effects of surfactin in combination with other classes of lipopeptides, especially iturin and fengycin [70,71], and also physical variables, such as temperature [72]. While growth-reducing effects of B. licheniformis-mediated surfactin C version on Brachyspira hyodysenteriae and Clostridium perfringens have been reported [73], combinations of lipopeptides and other bioactive metabolites appear to have stronger antimicrobial effects [74]. In particular, the iturin and fengycin families appear to play an important part [75,76]. In addition to the biosynthesis of lipopeptides, B. subtilis is also capable to produce other bioactive and antimicrobial metabolites, such as lantibiotics and macrolides [77,78], which have additional effects on microbial fitness. Overall, surfactin seems to be more potent in its antimicrobial activity through the sum of bioactive and antimicrobially active substances. In this study, surfactin showed growth-reducing effects in the cultivation of B. subtilis on a gram-per-litre scale. Overall, a reduction in maximum optical density of about 80% and in growth rate during the exponential phase of about 67% was observed between the reference cultivation and the supplementation of 70 g/L surfactin. Accordingly, it can be expected that the production of high surfactin amounts in bioreactor systems with mineral salt medium, as exemplified by Klausmann et al. [6], reduces microbial cell growth [6]. Whether specific productivity is also affected in this context should be investigated in future studies. The results of the proteome analysis already suggest that the expression of the srfA operon might be reduced by the increase of the Spx regulator, which acts as a repressor for the srfA operon [79]. Contrary to this assumption, for example, is the σB-mediated stimulation of the srfA operon expression during the general stress response [23]. However, no SrfA subunit was identified with a significantly altered protein abunadance after surfactin stress. Nevertheless, further analyses on possible post-translational feedback mechanisms of surfactin on lipopeptide biosynthesis needs to be addressed in the next studies. However, relatively high scale values in grams per litre were required to detect effects. In contrast, the treatment of rhamnolipids and sophorolipids as further exemplary microbially produced bioactive metabolites showed significantly lower minimal inhibitory concentrations. In this context, bacterial growth behavior was affected in different ways. While treatment with rhamnolipids induced cell lysis in B. subtilis, growth-reducing and bacteriostatic effects were observed in P. putida and E. coli, respectively. Based on the observation that rhamnolipids appear to have a negative feedback loop to P. putida, a natural limitation of heterologous rhamnolipid production with P. putida as host seems conceivable. In the case of sophorolipids, similar observations were made for B. subtilis (cell lysis) and C. glutamicum (inhibition of cell growth), while Gram-negative E. coli and P. putida were not affected in their growth using concentrations of up to 1 g/L. Consequently, both the mode of action and the antimicrobial efficiency of the respective bioactive metabolite seem to depend on the genus of the target organism. To get more knowledge about the response of B. subtilis after treatment with high amounts of surfactin, surfactin shock experiments were performed in mineral salt medium. Subsequent analysis of the proteome alteration confirmed the hypothesis of a reduction in growth as evidenced by the reduction of autolysins, which are involved in cell wall turnover during cell elongation and separation. Furthermore, proteomic data showed that B. subtilis activates both a specific stress response to protect the cell surface (σW) [80,81,82] and a non-specific and multiple stress resistance (σB) [83]. In this context, redox-sensitive modulators of the σB regulon, Spx and MgsR were induced, suggesting the stimulation of both cell wall stress and oxidative stress, which could be caused by surfactin-mediated damage to the cell membrane [62,63]. Additionally, the strong induction of LiaH indicates activation of the LiaRS two-component system, suggesting that surfactin-mediated cell surface penetration triggers a stress response comparable to that of other antibiotics that are active on the cell wall, such as bacitracin, nisin, ramoplanin, vancomycin and daptomycin [65,66]. Another cyclic lipopeptide described with antimicrobial properties, friulimicin B, produced by Actinoplanes friuliensis, shows inhibitory properties against peptidoglycan synthesis at sublethal amounts of 1 μg/mL [84,85]. Results by Wecke et al. showed that friulimicin B induces σM- and σV-mediated gene expression in B. subtilis [28]. In contrast to surfactin, activation of σW and LiaRS two-component system was not observed, suggesting that the cyclic lipopeptides produced by different bacteria differ in their interaction with the cell surface of B. subtilis and therefore stimulate different stress response mechanisms. This assumption was confirmed by comparable transcriptome analyses with friulimicin B and the structurally similar cyclic lipodepsipeptide daptomycin. While a clear LiaRS induction could be measured after daptomycin treatment, no activation was detectable for friulimicin B [28].