DISCUSSION In this study, we demonstrated that increased intracellular iron promotes intrinsic antibiotic resistance through altered respiration in two actinobacterial species, S. coelicolor and M. smegmatis. Actinomycetes are generally aerobic, Gram-positive bacteria and are predominantly found in soil. Since those deeper areas in soil are deemed short of oxygen and thus hypoxic (29), an alternative or microaerophilic respiration mode might be necessary for those aerobic bacteria to survive limited oxygen availability, as previously suggested for S. coelicolor (30). Oxygen is also thought to be limited near the center of the densely grown mycelial network. Moreover, iron metabolism might be also important for those bacteria thriving in soil, because soil is highly rich in iron compared to other natural habitats (20). For S. coelicolor and other soil actinomycetes that have well been adapted to such iron-rich hypoxic soil environments, iron-adapted respiration might be one of those strategies for survival. Although the precise modes by which S. coelicolor supports vegetative growth under hypoxic and iron-replete conditions need to be determined, our study makes it clear that the iron-induced alteration of respiration to enhance NADH oxidation lies behind the promotion of intrinsic resistance to bactericidal antibiotics in actinobacteria such as S. coelicolor and M. smegmatis. The effect of KCN on reducing the magnitude of NADH oxidation and cell survival under bactericidal antibiotics suggests that the altered respiration induced by iron could consist of multiple changes in respiratory pathways for NADH oxidation, differing in KCN sensitivity. The altered respiration might involve cytochrome bd oxidase produced from the cydAB operon upregulated by iron. Although our data showed that cydAB mutation did not change the iron effect in S. coelicolor (see Fig. S6 in the supplemental material), there still remains a possibility that the cytochrome bd oxidase may play some role, considering that mutations sometimes accompany compensating changes to compromise their effects. It was previously reported that the cydA mutant of M. smegmatis was highly sensitive to hydrogen peroxide and the antileprotic antibiotic clofazimine (31), corroborating the potential contribution of cytochrome bd oxidase and possibly some other alternative oxidases (26) to the intrinsic antibiotic resistance in these bacterial species. It should also be noted that this iron-promoted antibiotic resistance through altered respiration occurs against bactericidal antibiotics that are effective on actinobacteria, regardless of the primary targets of antibiotics. Despite some controversy about the exact nature of the culprit molecules, it has been shown that the killing effect of bactericidal antibiotics relies on the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) during aerobic respiration (27, 32). Recent studies also demonstrated that aerobic respiration makes the growing bacteria more susceptible to bactericidal antibiotics and facilitates eradication of persisters induced by the antibiotics (33, 34). A recent report revealed that an anaerobic respiration mode using nitrate as the final electron acceptor promotes intrinsic resistance to polymyxin B in Pseudomonas aeruginosa (35). This might be able to obviate the ROS generation that occurs during oxygen respiration in this bacterium. Likewise, it can be postulated that S. coelicolor and M. smegmatis, both of which are known as strict aerobic bacteria (36), could support the anaerobic type of respiration in an iron-rich soil environment. It has been demonstrated that S. coelicolor can utilize nitrate as an electron acceptor (37). However, nitrate respiration did not allow growth under anaerobic conditions but only maintained proton motive force enough to support dormancy, such as in spores (30). It has been postulated that alternative electron acceptors may be involved in generating proton motive force under hypoxic or anaerobic conditions, especially considering the more than 200 uncharacterized oxidoreductases in the S. coelicolor genome (17, 37). In this study, we have shown that iron can enhance respiration and hence the growth of S. coelicolor even under anaerobic conditions (Fig. 4C). How iron supports anaerobic respiration and growth of S. coelicolor and whether this phenomenon can be observed in other actinomycetes known to be strictly aerobic are intriguing questions to solve in the future. Although iron is an essential element for growth and survival for most microorganisms, high levels of free iron may result in progressive cell damage via the Fenton reaction, which generates hydroxyl radicals by one-electron transfer to hydrogen peroxides spontaneously produced during aerobic respiration. This iron-mediated toxicity has been exploited as an antibiotic adjuvant or inhibitor (38), as reported in some studies showing that iron could enhance antibiotic-dependent cell death and that decreasing iron concentrations led to increased antibiotic resistance (39–41). In contrast, some studies reported the opposite effect of iron, such that the efficacy of antibiotics was enhanced by iron chelators (42) and that an increased iron supply induced resistance to antibiotics (43). Considering the nature of iron as a two-edged sword, this apparent discrepancy might be associated with the differential availabilities and biological accessibilities of iron that depend on the microorganisms and/or the growth conditions. However, considering that kanamycin is one of the second-line antituberculosis (anti-TB) drugs for the treatment of extensively drug-resistant TB (44), some precaution may be needed in the use kanamycin or related bactericidal antibiotics for TB patients, whose lungs usually contain more iron than those of healthy individuals (45). Further studies are necessary to reveal the detailed biochemical mechanism of iron-promoted resistance, which may provide a deeper understanding of the various intrinsic resistance mechanisms in the microorganisms.