DISCUSSION In this work, we highlighted that S. olindensis has an extra MPx copy encoded by the cosmomycin biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC), acting in complementarity with the previously studied ABC transporter and UvrA class IIa anthracycline resistance proteins as a possible self-resistance factor during the production of COSD. Since other anthracycline BGCs containing the same genes are described in the literature—for example, a cytorhodin BGC (accession number MF773975.1) and other BGCs listed in Fig. S8—our findings can most likely be extended to some anthracycline-producing bacteria. The protein encoded by cosI belongs to the superfamily of ATP-dependent ABC transporters. The organization of this protein includes two motifs, Walker A and Walker B, providing an ATP-binding site, and contains the unique signature motif in ABC transporters that is located upstream from the Walker B motif. For S. olindensis, it was classified as type I: the transporter system consists of two proteins encoded by independent genes, with CosI (NBD) containing the nucleotide-binding domains (Walker A and Walker B) and CosJ (TMD), the hydrophobic membrane protein, containing six transmembrane (TM) helices (Fig. S1). ABC transporters belonging to this class have been so far reported solely in organisms that are producers of several antitumor agents (25). Daunorubicin and doxorubicin are anthracycline drugs produced by S. peucetius. Two genes (drrA and drrB) whose products form a type I transporter system have been cloned and found to confer resistance to daunorubicin/doxorubicin and mithramycin (mtrA and mtrB genes) (13, 14, 26–29). In Gram-positive bacteria, such as actinobacteria, it has been reported that MPx is a novel CysGPx peroxidase family that degrades hydrogen peroxide and alkyl hydroperoxides in the presence of either the thioredoxin/thioredoxin reductase (Trx/TrxR) or mycoredoxin 1/mycothiol/mycothione reductase (Mrx1MSH/Mtr) reducing systems. MPx protects against the damaging effects of ROS induced by multiple stressors, using thioredoxin or related redoxins as reductants (17, 30, 31). The S. olindensis genome has two putative genes that code for peroxidase-type proteins (accession numbers KDN80073.1 and KDN79115.1) and are involved in the general detoxification of H2O2. The protection is not only related to anthracycline production, in agreement with the results shown in Fig. 5 for the challenge with H2O2, in which S. olindensis and S. peucetius show a good detoxification response that is not related to any type of response against anthracycline production. Despite S. olindensis possessing two proteins that could cooperate in ROS depuration, the activity against H2O2 almost disappears in the KDN80073.1 mutant, indicating that this protein is an important scavenger of this peroxide in the cell, while S. peucetius has just one MPx annotated in its genome; however, it is more closely related to KDN79115.1 (67.82% identity) than to KDN80073.1 (56.33% identity). It is known that anthracyclines produce free radicals that may, in association with ferric compounds, cause oxidative stress (32). Oxidative stress depends on reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are generated by the action of xenobiotics and because of metabolic processes (33). The oxidizing power of O2.− and H2O2 is harmful to cells. These species can inactivate important metabolic enzymes or alter their catalytic activity. H2O2 can cross the cell membrane and initiate lipid oxidation by deprotonation of fatty acids (34). Biochemical and physiological data lead to the hypothesis that anthracyclines like DOX or, in our case, COSD can cause the formation of free radicals that stimulate lipid peroxidation and alter cellular integrity (35, 36). This hypothesis supports the premise that the oxidative metabolism of the anticancer quinones represents a significant contribution to the cytotoxic effects of these compounds (37). These species can inactivate important metabolic enzymes, altering their catalytic activity. In the case of H2O2, it can cross the cell membrane and initiate lipid oxidation by deprotonation of fatty acids (34), similar to findings reported for DOX during the redox cycle of anthracyclines (38). Interestingly, the study of Westman and collaborators (39) correlated the biological activity of 7-deoxydoxorubicinolone in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The authors could show that the levels of expression of catalase, superoxide dismutase, and glutathione peroxidase in bacterial cells are higher than the levels in human cells from cardiac tissue. They concluded that bacterial cells are much more competent at dealing with the outcomes of anthracycline semiquinone oxidation-reduction cycling and the resulting reactive oxygen species (ROS) that evolve and that Streptomyces bacteria are generally well equipped to deal with reactive oxygen stress (39). The aglycone molecules may accumulate in membranes due to their hydrophobicity; the rapid growth and division of bacterial cells relative to that of eukaryotic cardiac tissue may also explain the differential effects of anthracycline aglycones on prokaryotes and eukaryotes (39). Based on our present findings, we hypothesize that anthracyclines, such as COSD, are determinant in the production of ROS and that the recruitment of additional antioxidant enzymes coded in BGCs, such as KDN80073.1, can increase the self-resistance of antitumor antibiotics with potential cell toxicity. Another line of evidence is that KDN80073.1 groups with an independent protein cluster in the Pfam PF00255 family SSN, wherein all members belong to cosmomycin-like clusters (Fig. S7), which could also indicate that these proteins boost the protection against anthracycline-generated intracellular ROS. COSD reportedly binds DNA more tightly than DOX (40), but it causes less DNA damage than DOX; even so, the levels of apoptosis induced by both drugs in nucleotide excision repair-deficient fibroblasts are similar (16). CosU is responsible for minimizing the interaction between COSD and DNA, thereby avoiding damage. Normally, DNA damage recognition is performed by the protein UvrA, which belongs to the ABC ATPase superfamily. Bacterial UvrA is a dimeric protein, unique among DNA repair enzymes. This feature enables UvrA to detect various DNA lesions by using an indirect readout mechanism. Other proteins, namely, UvrB, UvrC, and UvrD, are components of nucleotide excision repair (NER) and are essential for the survival of almost every living bacterium (41, 42). The protein encoded by the cosU gene has a high similarity to UvrA proteins; however, it contains deletions of the UvrB-binding domain and the first zinc finger motif. For this reason, the protein function is not involved in NER and it is classified as a UvrA-like class IIa protein (43). Proteins of the latter class have been shown to behave in vitro like ATP-dependent DNA-binding proteins, such as that of S. peucetius from the daunorubicin cluster (10, 15), the nogalamycin produced by Streptomyces nogalater (44), the product of cmrX that confers resistance to chromomycin in Streptomyces griseus subsp. griseus (45), and the product of mtrX, which is a UvrA-like protein involved in mithramycin resistance in Streptomyces argillaceus (46). Interestingly, the most common characteristic of these antitumor antibiotics is that they intercalate to DNA and could represent a DNA-binding protein that plays a role in self-resistance, inhibiting or destabilizing the interaction of these drugs with genomic DNA, thus preventing intercalating antibiotics from interfering with cell transcription and/or replication. This suggests in turn that the function of UvrA class IIa proteins is associated with the removal of noncovalent DNA-binding agents. Finally, we propose a model (Fig. 7) for the self-resistance in S. olindensis strain DAUFPE 5622 during cosmomycin D biosynthesis. This compound is recognized by the ABC transporter CosI/CosJ, and then mycothiol peroxidase (CosP) participates in the protection against H2O2 and lipid peroxidation caused by anthracyclines. The UvrA-like protein is important for reducing the interaction between DNA and the antibiotic. This mode of resistance represents an advantage for the producer strain for survival during antibiotic biosynthesis; the organism avoids the interaction of the harmful compound COSD with its intracellular target. Streptomyces evolution developed different strategies of self-resistance, and these depend on the form of action of the active compound. It is important to understand those mechanisms in producer microorganisms to evaluate plausible horizontal transfer in pathogenic strains and to develop therapeutic alternatives. FIG 7Proposed model for self-resistance to cosmomycin D in S. olindensis. Mechanisms of self-resistance for COSD: drug efflux function is by CosI and CosJ; CosU protein is involved in DNA repair, scanning the COSD-DNA-binding complex; and CosP (MPx) enzyme is proposed as a new self-resistance mechanism for H2O2 detoxification. Proposed model for self-resistance to cosmomycin D in S. olindensis. Mechanisms of self-resistance for COSD: drug efflux function is by CosI and CosJ; CosU protein is involved in DNA repair, scanning the COSD-DNA-binding complex; and CosP (MPx) enzyme is proposed as a new self-resistance mechanism for H2O2 detoxification.