DISCUSSION We have shown that aminoglycosides inhibit phage infection in a diverse set of bacterial hosts by blocking an early step of the phage life cycle prior to DNA replication. These findings highlight the multifunctionality of this class of antibiotics, as they possess both antibacterial and antiviral properties. The dual properties of aminoglycosides were first recognized in the 1950s and 1960s (10–12, 22), but mechanistic studies about their impact on phage infection differed in their conclusions. Brock and colleagues proposed a 2-fold inhibition of streptomycin on Enterococcus faecium, where streptomycin would be able to inhibit both genome injection and replication (12). In the same year, it was proposed that streptomycin inhibits the process of injection of these phages by preventing proper unfolding of the phage genome through cross-linking of the phage DNA (23). Recently, Jiang and colleagues reported the inhibition of two M. tuberculosis phages by streptomycin, kanamycin, and hygromycin (19). Following adsorption and quantifying of viral DNA, the authors proposed that the blockage caused by aminoglycosides occurs between genome circularization and replication. Our results put forward different pictures depending on the bacterial host. Infection with λ and Alderaan phages seems to be blocked at the genome replication stage by apramycin in both cases. However, we cannot exclude some additional interference with the injection step of phage Alderaan. This disparity presumably has its roots in the major differences in cell wall architectures between Gram-positive and -negative bacteria. Moreover, it opens the possibility that aminoglycosides exert a multilayered inhibition of phage infection in their natural producers. More recently, sublethal aminoglycoside concentrations of aminoglycosides were shown to inhibit phage infection in E. coli and Bacillus cereus (24). Interestingly, tetracycline, another translation-inhibiting antibiotic binding to the 30S ribosome, was much less effective at suppressing phage proliferation. This difference suggests a direct antiphage action of aminoglycosides and indicates that inhibition of phage replication is not a common trait of antibiotics blocking protein synthesis. One crucial question is that of which structural features or chemical groups of aminoglycosides are responsible for their antiphage properties. Our screening revealed that aminoglycosides belonging to 3 of 4 subclasses showed antiphage activity, suggesting that these properties are widespread among aminoglycosides and not limited to one particular subclass. Furthermore, a potential antiviral activity is probably also strongly influenced by the uptake and cell envelope structure of a particular host species. However, thorough structure-function relationship studies are needed to address this topic. The versatility of aminoglycosides can be attributed to their ability to bind a wide variety of molecules, including nucleic acids—DNA or RNA, biologically or nonbiologically derived. The most prominent target of aminoglycosides is the 16S rRNA, accounting for the disruption of protein translation and hence their bactericidal properties (13). Aminoglycosides have also been shown to bind to seemingly unrelated families of RNA molecules such as group I introns (25), a hammerhead ribozyme (26), the trans-activating response element (TAR) (27) and the Rev response element (RRE) of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (28–30). Interestingly, this effect on HIV is the only report of a direct inhibition of eukaryotic viruses by aminoglycosides. Evidence of indirect influence on infection by eukaryotic viruses comprises the activation of interferon-based antiviral response following topical application of aminoglycosides (31), and the enhancement of plaque formation by coxsackieviruses via increased diffusion of virions in the extracellular matrix (32). Furthermore, in vitro studies showed condensation of purified phage λ DNA by aminoglycosides. It was proposed that the clamp formed by aminoglycosides around the DNA double helix causes a bend responsible for the formation of toroids and other structural deformations (33, 34). Injected phage DNA is linear, in a relaxed state, and not protected by DNA-binding proteins, and it is therefore probably highly sensitive to DNA-binding molecules. Interestingly, anthracyclines—another class of secondary metabolites produced by Streptomyces strains with antiphage properties—inhibit phage infection at a similar stage (5). While the exact mechanism of action underlying phage inhibition by anthracyclines and aminoglycosides remains elusive, these recent results suggest that already injected but not yet replicating phage DNA is preferentially targeted by antiviral molecules. Repeated efforts to isolate Alderaan clones that developed resistance to apramycin were not successful, suggesting that phage inhibition by apramycin relies on structural properties of phage DNA that cannot be readily overcome by single-base mutations or small structural variants. Therapeutical use of phages—known as phage therapy—is often combined with an antibiotic treatment due to the potentially synergistic effect between these two antimicrobial agents. In contrast, we describe here an antagonistic impact of a common antibiotic class on phages, which has important implications for phage-aminoglycoside combination treatment. We propose that sensitivity of the phage to aminoglycosides be assessed in vitro before administration of such combination therapy. From a more fundamental perspective, these findings also shed new light on the role of aminoglycosides in natural bacterial communities. While their use as antibiotics for medical applications has been extensively documented, until now, relatively little was known about their function in the natural setting. We posit that aminoglycosides not only are used by their producers as a powerful weapon against bacterial competitors but also protect them against phage predation at the community level. In streptomycetes, antibiotic production happens mainly at later stages of development, typically during the formation of aerial hyphae (35–37), while phages preferentially attack young mycelium (38). This clear difference in chronology may make secondary-metabolite-mediated antiphage defense seem irrelevant when studied in a laboratory setting. However, this defense strategy takes its full meaning in the light of community ecology, where older fractions of an established microbial community could ensure a protective “antiviral milieu” for their descendants. Another key consideration to appreciate aminoglycoside antiviral properties in an ecological context concerns the importance of the resistance mechanism to these antibiotics. Using Streptomyces venezuelae and its phage Alderaan, we showed that acetylation of apramycin led to a loss of its antibacterial properties, while leaving its ability to block phage infection untouched. Assuming that this observation can be extended to more phages and aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes, it raises the question of whether deflecting the antibacterial effect of aminoglycosides while benefiting from their intracellular protective effect against phages would be a strategy favored over antibiotic resistance by efflux. Interestingly, unlike many antibiotic classes (39), efflux proteins reported to pump out aminoglycosides are relatively rare and conferred only partial resistance to aminoglycosides (13). In contrast, aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes are widespread and found in natural producers and clinical isolates alike (13, 40). Natural aminoglycoside producers often encode a second line of resistance represented by 16S rRNA methyltransferases, whose action makes their ribosomes insensitive to aminoglycosides without interfering with the action of the latter on phages (40). Considering the colossal number of molecules produced by environmental bacteria whose physiological role is still unclear, we postulate that additional prokaryotic antiphage metabolites are to be discovered in the future, further underlining the extraordinary diversity of strategies employed by bacteria against their viral predators.