Discussion In this study, we have discovered an abundant repertoire of putative microbial-originated genes in 14 tested plant genomes that confer resistance to a wide range of abiotic stresses commonly encountered by plants, with the putative microbial HGT donors spanning from viruses, bacteria, fungi to protists (
Table 2
 and see 
Table S1
 at https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.20530083.v1). We have also applied in-silico approaches to verify the accuracy of blast-based HGT inference (phylogenetic analyses), the functionality of the 3D protein fold encoded by such HGT genes (deep-learning-driven protein structure prediction, fold alignment, molecular dynamics etc.), and the expression potential of HGT genes (codon adaption index calculation). The emergence and mechanism of HGT events (“Why does lateral transfer occur in so many species and how?”) is recommended as a still-pending and significant scientific question worthy of more in-depth ivestigations by the editorial of the journal Science in the article “So much more to know” (American Association for the Advancement of Science, 2005), and we prudently considered that the present research might have supplied some hints for this question. HGT can serve as a significant force that supplies species with genetic innovations and regulation flexibility that guarantees successful migration into novel niches. In our results, we found that the most commonly seen microbial HGT donor taxon for acquisition of resistance genes is Burkholderiaceae (n=10). Members of Burkholderiaceae are characterized as plant-associated, which usually constitute the core floral community (Massoni et al., 2021). Besides, we found that Chlorophyta taxa (e.g. Chlorella variabilis NC64A, n=42) generally have more HGT resistance genes than lower-grade Streptophyta taxa (e.g. Physcomitrella patens patens (moss), n=21), which outnumber those from high-grade land plant (e.g. Ricinus communis Hale (castor bean), n=14). Such richness of HGT genes associated with abiotic stress resistance especially those within the transition-stage lineages might have reflected a ring linking to the early adaption processes of plant to accomplish the colonization of land environment from aquatic. These HGT genes seem well-suited to combat abiotic factors more frequently encountered in land environments (e.g., desiccation, fluctuations of temperature, UV radiation), in consistence with previous studies (de Vries et al., 2016; Pennisi, 2019; Bowles et al., 2020). The mechanism leading to such abundant cross-lineage gene transfer into plant genomes might be explained by the “weak-link model” (Huang, 2013). Namely, foreign DNA fragments (e.g., from microbes) could be naturally imported into the plant receptors at the susceptible stages in plant lifecycle, such as the single-cell/preliminary stages (germline cells, embryos, etc.) or dedifferentiation/asexual reproduction stages. The microbe-plant HGT processes can be promoted by intimate or direct physical contact through symbiosis, parasitism, infection, or other associations, especially when the weakly-protected cells are exposed to the environment. Once getting into the cell, fixation of HGT genes to the recipient genome can be facilitated by the still undergoing organellar DNA fragment integrations into the nuclear chromosome in the developing cells, followed by vertical transfer of integrated HGT genes to offspring cells via mitosis (Huang, 2013). Concerns regarding such cross-lineage HGT genes might be the authenticity of both HGT direction and identification during the inference and the functionality of such HGT genes in the plant genomes. It has been argued that some of such HGT genes in the eukaryotic genome might result from endosymbiotic origin or contamination (Koutsovoulos et al., 2016). To alleviate these concerns, we have integrated into our study the “gold standard” verification for the detected HGT genes: that a particular gene has been gained through HGT from a different lineage would be phylogenetic incongruence, where an evolutionary tree for a specific protein family is distinct from the established organismal phylogeny (Schönknecht et al., 2014). For example, the well-supported phylogenetic tree of chromate transporters (ChrA) (Fig. 1a) shows the protein sequence from Ricinus communis and green algae embedded within bacterial sequences. The most parsimonious explanation for this phylogenetic distribution is HGT from bacteria. Regarding the direction of the gene acquisition (microbe to plant instead of the reverse), it is ensured through the HGT detection pipeline IMGAP v.5.0 that only selects HGT candidate genes showing the best hits outside the taxonomic lineage of the tested genome (i. e. from distant phylum, class, etc.), but with lower-scoring or no hits within the lineage of the tested genome. The precise method for identification of HGTs by the IMGAP pipeline has been expatiated by Markowitz et al. (2010). Furthermore, our supplemented phylogenetic analyses have also supported the direction of the predicted HGTs. As for excluding the possibility of false positive induced by contamination, we included in our analyses only high-quality complete (or near-complete) genome assemblies of plants (
Table 1
), and our phylogenetic analyses further indicate that the historical HGT events not only occurred once but also can be confidently identified in cases in related plant taxa. For example, in the well-supported phylogenetic tree of copper homeostasis protein (CutC), the HGT-driven homologues were detected in a range of different green algae (from Chlamydomonas on the top of the tree to Coccomyxa inserted in the middle of the tree), again intertwined with branches leading to bacteria taxa. This suggested that such HGT events should be very likely actual since the probability that the said green algae’s genome sequences happen to contaminate simultaneously the same kind of DNA fragments in lab is minor. As for the functionality of the HGT genes in the plant genomes, we have resorted to multiple methods (e.g., structure analysis and codon adaption index calculation) to illustrate the functionality of the HGT genes related to plant abiotic stress resistance. In line with our results, previous studies have experimentally verified that many horizontally transferred genes in plants Orobanchaceae, Cuscuta and Rafflesia are being expressed (Xi et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2016; Vogel et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019). What’s even more surprising is that twelve of the HGT genes in Alloteropsis semialata (grass) genome have a higher expression level than their native homologues, and in one case, the native copy was replaced by the foreign one (Dunning et al., 2019). In consistence, our CAI calculation results also supported relatively high expression levels across the microbe-originated abiotic stress resistance genes in plants, which emphasized their significant functions in supporting the growth of the plant host in the face of harsh abiotic conditions. In summary, the microbe-originated HGT genes in plant genomes identified in our analyses and their participation in resistance against diverse abiotic pressures commonly encountered in land environments indicate a widespread and profound impact of HGT on the evolution of plants and other eukaryotes. Still, our analysis presented here is not exhaustive. We believe that the microbe-to-plant HGT cases discovered by far stand for only the tip of the profound evolutionary iceberg. As more and more genomic sequences of superior quality become available for wider lineage branches in the tree of plants, it is foreseeable that future research will provide us with a more exciting panorama illustrating both the extent and the evolutionary significance of HGT in plants thoroughly.