DISCUSSION Soil-dwelling bacteria of the genus Streptomyces are among the most important producers of secondary metabolites, facilitating the production of over two-thirds of all antibiotics in clinical use today (43). Such vast biosynthetic capacity of streptomycetes, which is accompanied by a complex developmental life cycle, clearly requires tight regulation and coordination of the involved processes. Regulated proteolysis has emerged as an important level of regulation that is intricately linked to cell cycle progression and physiological transitions (44). We aimed to study the molecular function of the housekeeping Streptomyces Clp protease machinery, an essential compartmentalized protease in Streptomyces and a major player of regulated proteolysis in bacteria (3–5, 45). The Streptomyces Clp system is one of the most complex known to date, since streptomycetes encode up to five different ClpP homologs and at least four different Clp-ATPases (3, 21). Previous work by Mazodier and colleagues on S. lividans cells provided the first important insights into the potential working mode of the Streptomyces Clp protease (22, 23). They observed that the presence of ClpP1 and ClpP2 precluded the expression of ClpP3 and ClpP4 and that the presence of both ClpP1 and ClpP2 was necessary for the digestion of PopR or ClgR. Hence, their data suggested the presence of housekeeping Clp proteases with one or more proteolytic cores, consisting of either ClpP1, ClpP2, or even both homologs, as well as a back-up conferred by ClpP3 and/or ClpP4 that takes over the most important cellular functions in case of a dysfunction of the housekeeping Clp machinery. Almost two decades later, we have now deciphered the composition and molecular operation mode of the housekeeping Clp protease in Streptomyces via in vitro reconstitution of the protease system side-by-side with corresponding cell-based studies. Here, we prove that the Streptomyces housekeeping Clp protease contains a heterotetradecameric, proteolytic core of both ClpP1 and ClpP2 that interacts with the corresponding Clp-ATPases ClpX, ClpC1, or ClpC2 for the degradation of proteins, such as the natural Clp substrates ClgR and PopR. Within the assembled Clp protease variants, we show that ClpP1 and ClpP2 fulfill distinct but complementary functions with regard to substrate hydrolysis. Our results clearly indicate that mainly ClpP1 confers catalytic activity to the proteolytic core, while ClpP2 is essential for the interaction with the corresponding Clp-ATPases to allow for substrate unfolding and translocation into the degradation chamber of ClpP1P2. Our data further indicate that the heteromeric ClpP1P2 core is formed by two separate homoheptameric rings of either ClpP1 or ClpP2. Functional Clp-ATPases are hexamers, and all six IGF-loops of E. coli ClpX (EcClpX) are required for productive substrate digestion by EcClpXP (46). In that study, even the loss of a single IGF-loop reduced the affinity of EcClpX to EcClpP by approximately 50-fold. In the Streptomyces ClpP1P2 core, the mutation of the ClpP1 hydrophobic pocket did not affect the hydrolysis of native substrates at all, which clearly argues against the presence of even a single ClpP1 monomer in the Clp-ATPase-interacting ClpP2 ring. In addition, both Streptomyces ClpP1 as well as ClpP2 exist as homoheptamers (as well as homotetradecamers for ClpP1) as revealed by size exclusion chromatography in our study, making the presence of mixed heptamers in the active protease highly unlikely. The presence of two homoheptameric rings of either ClpP1 or ClpP2 in Streptomyces further correlates with the composition of the ClpP system in the closely related M. tuberculosis (33, 47, 48) and Mycobacterium smegmatis (20) as well as L. monocytogenes (16, 49), which form heterotetradecamers composed of a ClpP1 heptamer stacked to a ClpP2 heptamer and those complexes bind Clp-ATPases solely via ClpP2. S. hawaiiensis is the producer of the ClpP-interfering antibiotic ADEP1, the natural product progenitor of a promising class of potent acyldepsipeptide antibiotics (26, 28, 31, 50), and the ADEP mode of action has been investigated in more detail in the major target bacteria. Until now, the effects of ADEP on the housekeeping Clp protease of the producer genus Streptomyces have remained mostly elusive. Pioneering cell-based studies by Mazodier and colleagues (36) using the ADEP-sensitive S. lividans showed that ClpP1 is a target for ADEP1, since the deletion of the clpP1 gene conferred ADEP resistance in S. lividans. In addition, we have recently reported on the presence of a self-resistance factor in the ADEP producer S. hawaiiensis NRRL 15010, which is an accessory ClpP protein with a yet unknown mechanism (26). To obtain further insights into the role of ADEP in Streptomyces, we here investigated the effect of ADEP on the molecular function of the housekeeping Clp protease systems of S. hawaiiensis and S. lividans. Of note, the ClpP1 and ClpP2 proteins of S. hawaiiensis show very high amino acid sequence similarities to their corresponding homologs in S. lividans, thus suggesting a similar operation mode of ClpP1P2 in both species (Fig. S1D). Previous studies on the mode of action of ADEP antibiotics have identified two distinct molecular mechanisms that, either together or individually, lead to bacterial killing. Intriguingly, the killing mode depends on the bacterial species and growth environment, and both mechanisms are described as follows. First, since Clp-ATPases and ADEP accommodate the same binding site on ClpP in the species studied so far, the binding of ADEP to ClpP displaces the commonly associated Clp-ATPases from the proteolytic core (19, 37–40). This leads to an inhibition of all physiological functions of the Clp protease in the bacterial cell, including regulated proteolysis. Second, ADEP binding induces an opening of the ClpP entrance pores and allosterically activates the catalytic centers, thereby allowing access of nonnative substrates to the ClpP degradation chamber that are efficiently degraded (19, 30, 34, 35, 38, 51, 52). The latter activation of the independent proteolytic core ClpP is the primary cause of bacterial killing in species harboring nonessential ClpP proteins, such as B. subtilis or S. aureus (27, 29, 30, 51, 53, 54). However, in an infection situation, where the Clp protease is essential for the expression of important virulence factors, inhibition of the natural functions will also attenuate a pathogen in the host environment (55, 56). In M. tuberculosis, the Clp protease is essential for viability under all conditions (48, 57), and we have previously shown that an ADEP-conferred mechanism of Clp protease inhibition leads to cell death in mycobacteria (39). Considering the essentiality of the Clp protease in Streptomyces and the comparative phylogenetic closeness to mycobacteria (21), it was thus tempting to hypothesize a mechanism of Clp protease inhibition as the basis of ADEP-dependent killing of Streptomyces. To our surprise, ADEP did not abrogate the Clp-ATPase-mediated substrate digestion. All our data consistently show that the presence of ADEP leads to an unexpected stimulation of the Streptomyces Clp protease to digest its natural substrates in a Clp-ATPase-dependent, more efficient manner, rather than leading to an inhibition of its natural functions. Furthermore, ADEP-stimulated Clp-ATPase/ClpP1P2 activity was not due to an increased ATP turnover. Hence, stimulation may be solely attributed to the ADEP effects that are exerted on the structural network of the entire ClpP1P2 complex. This may include adjustment of the active site residues in ClpP1 as well as pore opening for ClpP1 and ClpP2, as was previously described for ADEP-activated ClpP in other bacteria (15, 34, 35, 38). Therefore, the current study reveals a third, yet unobserved, mode of ADEP action. This new ADEP effect observed here can be explained by our observation that, in Streptomyces, the proteolytic ClpP1P2 core can be powered simultaneously by two different activator types. We found ADEP to bind solely to ClpP1 of S. hawaiiensis and S. lividans. Very recently, asymmetric binding of ADEP to ClpP1 was also observed for ClpP1P2 heterotetradecamers of Streptomyces cattleya (58) suggesting that this binding mode is a general characteristic of the genus Streptomyces. Furthermore, our in vitro and cell-based data consistently reveal that the ClpP2 apical face of the Streptomyces ClpP1P2 core serves as the sole docking site for three different Clp-ATPases. The simultaneous and unhindered binding of ADEP and a Clp-ATPase to opposite sides of the Streptomyces ClpP core is unique among all the Clp systems investigated so far. Considering previous studies on ClpP proteins from other bacteria and the effects of ADEP antibiotics, structural analyses identified three different conformations of the ClpP tetradecamer: a proteolytically active, extended conformation, an inactive, compact intermediate, and an inactive, compressed conformation. The conformations all differ in the height of the ClpP barrel as well as the alignment of the catalytic triad residues (14, 59–63). The Clp protease core is understood to dynamically switch between these different conformations, thereby exhibiting separate steps of substrate hydrolysis and product release during processive substrate degradation (49, 64, 65). Here, degradation products might exit the degradation chamber through transient equatorial pores that emerge in the proteolytically inactive, compressed conformation rather than through the axial pores that may be blocked by the partner Clp-ATPases (62). Importantly, we and others have previously shown that the binding of ADEP to ClpP leads to long-distance conformational changes, thereby opening the entrance pores to the degradation chamber and locking the ClpP tetradecamer in the active, extended conformation (15, 34, 35, 38). In our current study, binding of ADEP1 led to the presence of proteolytically active ClpP1 homotetradecamers, potentially shifting ClpP1 homotetradecamers from the compressed, inactive conformation to the extended, active conformation. Also, ADEP binding stimulated proteolysis by ClpP1P2hp heterotetradecamers carrying a defective ClpP2 hydrophobic pocket. Both findings clearly indicate the capacity of ADEP1 to open the entrance pores to the degradation chamber by docking to Streptomyces ClpP1, since this is a prerequisite for the entry of protein substrates and subsequent protein digestion (9, 10). We therefore propose the following model of ADEP action in Streptomyces (Fig. 6): the partner Clp-ATPase binds to the ClpP1P2 proteolytic core via ClpP2 and unfolds and feeds the natural protein substrates into the degradation chamber. The simultaneous binding of ADEP to the opposite side of the proteolytic core via ClpP1 stabilizes the core in the proteolytically active, extended conformation (including the correct arrangement of the active centers for catalysis) and stimulates the proteolysis of natural Clp substrates that are fed by the Clp-ATPase via ClpP2. This process may be further accelerated by a more efficient product release through an opened pore of the ADEP-bound ClpP1 heptamer of the proteolytically active tetradecameric core. We have previously shown that ADEP-activated EcClpP degrades largely unstructured proteins like casein with reduced processivity compared to EcClpAP (37). This may be explained by the diffusion of partially cleaved substrates through the opened axial pores in ADEP-activated EcClpP, thereby impeding processive cleavage, whereas such escape of degradation intermediates is prevented in EcClpAP (35). However, in our model for the Streptomyces Clp protease, Clp-ATPase-dependent processive cleavage would be allowed even in the presence of ADEP, potentially stimulating the degradation of natural Clp substrates. In the closely related M. tuberculosis, ADEP binds to only one side of the ClpP heterotetradecamer exclusively (i.e., to MtClpP2) but was shown in crystal structures to open the entrance pores on both sides of the barrel (15). Thus, it may be further hypothesized that upon binding of ADEP to Streptomyces ClpP1, long-distance conformational shifts might help to widen the diameter of the ClpP2 axial pore, which could additionally ease the feeding of proteins substrates by the Clp-ATPase. FIG 6Mechanisms of action of ADEP antibiotics in Streptomyces and other bacteria. (A) Model of the housekeeping Clp protease in Streptomyces and its deregulation by ADEP antibiotics. The major Clp protease in Streptomyces is composed of a heterotetradecameric core formed by ClpP1 and ClpP2 that interacts with the AAA+ chaperones ClpX, ClpC1, or ClpC2 via ClpP2. The catalytic triad of ClpP1 is solely responsible for enzymatic hydrolysis of protein and polypeptide substrates. By binding to the ClpP1P2 proteolytic core via ClpP2, the Clp-ATPases unfold and feed natural protein substrates into the degradation chamber in an ATP-dependent manner. Simultaneous binding of ADEP can occur at the opposite side of the proteolytic core via ClpP1, which locks the core in the proteolytically active extended conformation and stimulates the proteolysis of natural Clp substrates that are fed by a Clp-ATPase via ClpP2. Binding of the antibiotic to ClpP1 also widens the ClpP1 entrance pore to allow entry of nonnative substrates into the ClpP1P2 heterotetradecamer. In addition, ADEP triggers the oligomerization of ClpP1 into a homotetradecamer, which is thereby activated for Clp-ATPase-independent proteolysis of nonnative substrates. As the presence of ClpP1 alone (i.e., in the absence of ClpP2) is sufficient to sensitize Streptomyces against ADEP, the degradation of nonnative protein and polypeptide substrates is the primary reason for cell death in this species. Nonetheless, while the physiological protein substrates of the Clp protease can still be degraded in the presence of ADEP, accelerated degradation of native substrates will probably also stress the cells through protein imbalance. (B) Summary of mechanisms of action of ADEP antibiotics across different bacterial species. We have previously described that ADEP antibiotics can lead to the inhibition of natural Clp protease functions (1) as well as to the uncontrolled degradation on nonnatural Clp substrates in the absence of otherwise regulating Clp-ATPases (2). We here present a third, new mechanism of ADEP action that manifests in the producer genus Streptomyces and leads to the acceleration of the Clp-ATPase-dependent digestion of natural Clp protease substrates (3). Mechanisms of action of ADEP antibiotics in Streptomyces and other bacteria. (A) Model of the housekeeping Clp protease in Streptomyces and its deregulation by ADEP antibiotics. The major Clp protease in Streptomyces is composed of a heterotetradecameric core formed by ClpP1 and ClpP2 that interacts with the AAA+ chaperones ClpX, ClpC1, or ClpC2 via ClpP2. The catalytic triad of ClpP1 is solely responsible for enzymatic hydrolysis of protein and polypeptide substrates. By binding to the ClpP1P2 proteolytic core via ClpP2, the Clp-ATPases unfold and feed natural protein substrates into the degradation chamber in an ATP-dependent manner. Simultaneous binding of ADEP can occur at the opposite side of the proteolytic core via ClpP1, which locks the core in the proteolytically active extended conformation and stimulates the proteolysis of natural Clp substrates that are fed by a Clp-ATPase via ClpP2. Binding of the antibiotic to ClpP1 also widens the ClpP1 entrance pore to allow entry of nonnative substrates into the ClpP1P2 heterotetradecamer. In addition, ADEP triggers the oligomerization of ClpP1 into a homotetradecamer, which is thereby activated for Clp-ATPase-independent proteolysis of nonnative substrates. As the presence of ClpP1 alone (i.e., in the absence of ClpP2) is sufficient to sensitize Streptomyces against ADEP, the degradation of nonnative protein and polypeptide substrates is the primary reason for cell death in this species. Nonetheless, while the physiological protein substrates of the Clp protease can still be degraded in the presence of ADEP, accelerated degradation of native substrates will probably also stress the cells through protein imbalance. (B) Summary of mechanisms of action of ADEP antibiotics across different bacterial species. We have previously described that ADEP antibiotics can lead to the inhibition of natural Clp protease functions (1) as well as to the uncontrolled degradation on nonnatural Clp substrates in the absence of otherwise regulating Clp-ATPases (2). We here present a third, new mechanism of ADEP action that manifests in the producer genus Streptomyces and leads to the acceleration of the Clp-ATPase-dependent digestion of natural Clp protease substrates (3). Indeed, our results clearly indicate the existence of an inherent communication network between the ClpP1 and ClpP2 heptameric rings of the Streptomyces ClpP barrel. For example, the binding of a Clp-ATPase to ClpP2 led to catalytic stimulation of ClpP1, potentially implying an allosteric activation mechanism for ClpP1 upon concerted conformational rearrangements in both heptameric rings. In addition, self-processing of ClpP1 was induced by the binding of ClpX to ClpP2 at the opposite side of the heteromeric complex in vitro. Inter-ring communication is not unusual among Clp proteases studied to date (66–69). For example, Weber-Ban and colleagues (70) showed that in asymmetric E. coli ClpP tetradecamers, composed of one wild-type and one catalytically inactive heptameric ring, ClpA-ATPase activity could be stimulated by ClpP regardless of whether ClpA bound to the wild-type or the catalytically inactive ring. Recently, it has also been shown that the presence of catalytically active ClpP proteins is required to activate ClpA. This happens through an allosteric signal across the ClpA-ClpP interaction surface (71). The results presented in this study unravel the composition and molecular operation mode of the Streptomyces housekeeping Clp protease machinery as well as its unique stimulation by ADEP antibiotics. The protein imbalance upon enhanced degradation of natural Clp substrates can be expected to cause severe cellular stress. However, the ADEP-mediated catalytic acceleration of the Clp-ATPase-controlled digestion of natural Clp substrates is not the only kind of deregulation that ADEP inflicts on the Streptomyces Clp protease machinery. The efficient degradation of casein by the ADEP-bound ClpP1P2 heterotetradecamer and ClpP1 homotetradecamer shows that nonnative substrates gain access to both ADEP-activated proteolytic cores, via the opened entrance pore of the ClpP1 heptameric ring. Also, S. lividans mutants carrying ClpP1 but lacking ClpP2 were killed by ADEP application. This illustrates that Clp-ATPase-independent and thus uncontrolled proteolysis of essential and nonessential polypeptide or protein substrates is already sufficient to cause cell death in Streptomyces.