DISCUSSION The purpose of the present study was to examine neuromuscular function in the morning versus the evening, with specific aims to identify differences between limbs and sexes. Although evening superiority for isometric force is well‐documented, there is an absence of data regarding limb‐ and sex‐dependent responses. The main findings shown here demonstrate that the time‐of‐day influence on neuromuscular function is limb‐dependent. The novel findings show: (1) maximal isometric force is greater in the evening for the knee extensors, but not the elbow flexors, (2) there was a small effect for greater maximal muscle excitation in the evening for the biceps brachii, but not the vastus lateralis, and (3) force steadiness was influenced by time‐of‐day and sex. Maximal force and EMG The results show increased maximal isometric force in the knee extensors during the evening versus the morning which is in line with previous data (Knaier et al., 2019; Nicolas et al., 2008), while the elbow flexors show no significant time‐of‐day response which does not align with previous research (Gauthier et al., 1997; Zbidi et al., 2016). Nicolas et al. (2008) examined the neuromuscular parameters of the vastus lateralis between morning (06:00 h) and evening (18:00 h) testing sessions and found a 6.8% increase in maximal force from morning to evening which aligns with the current findings. Of the previous studies that utilize maximal isometric contractions, reports show diurnal changes in force ranging from 10% to 12% for the knee extensors (Giacomoni et al., 2005; Guette et al., 2005a) and 14% to 22% for the elbow flexors (Gauthier et al., 1997). Guette et al. (2005a) show that isometric force of the knee extensors for both dominant and the non‐dominant leg increased by 11% in the evening compared to the morning, which aligns with the present data that exclusively utilized the dominant leg and found a mean increase of 10% from morning to evening. Giacomoni et al. (2005) found minimal evidence of time‐of‐day effects for knee extensor force across six different times of the day. Gauthier et al. (1997) tested maximal isometric elbow flexion at six different times of day and found an approximately 14% increase in force in the evening (15:00–18:00 h) compared to morning (06:00–09:00 h) sessions while the current study found only a mean 2% increase in maximal isometric force from morning to evening. In a multi‐day protocol, Sedliak et al. (2008) found an increase in maximal force of the knee extensors from morning to evening over a two‐day period, highlighting the day‐to‐day repeatability of diurnal patterns in muscle force. It is unclear why the influence of time‐of‐day on maximal force was specific to the knee extensors, it is possible that physiological differences in neural innervation and contractile properties explain the contrasting responses, but methodological considerations relating to ambulation through the day may have a role. The EMG data shows that maximal muscle excitation was opposite of participant maximal force, with the vastus lateralis showing no significant difference in excitation between morning and evening while the excitation of the biceps brachii was slightly higher in the evening than in the morning on average. The majority of participants (~60%) showed greater EMG amplitude values in the evening versus the morning for the biceps brachii but there was considerable interindividual variability and a few high responders to evening testing (Figure 3) so this finding should be interpreted with caution. Nevertheless, the EMG data are interesting as previous work shows a parallel increase in EMG with force in the evening versus the morning (Castaingts et al., 2004; Küüsmaa et al., 2015). However, this is not a consistent finding as other studies have shown no significant time‐of‐day influence on muscle excitation for the biceps brachii (Gauthier et al., 1996) and vastus lateralis (Guette et al., 2005a; Nicolas et al., 2008; Sedliak et al., 2008). Importantly, these studies show that maximal force is generally greater in the evening despite similar muscle excitation levels in the morning and evening. Although neural drive is a determinant of muscle force, potential neural mechanisms to explain diurnal variation in force levels remain elusive. Since others (Gauthier et al., 1996; Gueldich et al., 2016; Martin et al., 1999; Sedliak et al., 2008) have shown that the rate of force development is greater in the evening, we examined several intervals of the force‐ and EMG‐time curves during ballistic intent contraction as an indirect way to infer volitional neural drive since these measurements are largely determined by motor neuron behavior (Del Vecchio et al., 2019). We show no time‐of‐day effect for RFD or RER, though the effect sizes followed a similar pattern as the maximal force values for the respective limbs. There is compelling evidence from transcranial stimulation data that diurnal variations influence GABA‐mediated intracortical inhibition and cortical excitability (Lang et al., 2011; Tamm et al., 2009). Tamm et al. (2009) show that differences in corticospinal excitability levels between the morning and evening depend on the diurnal chronotype of the individual, similar interindividual variation in the time‐of‐day response between diurnal chronotypes has been shown in training studies (Chtourou et al., 2012; Küüsmaa et al., 2016). Nevertheless, our EMG inferences provide little insight into the neural contributions to the present force data. The diurnal changes in the contractile properties of the muscle may be attributed to intracellular variation of calcium kinetics and excitation‐contraction coupling mechanisms (Edgar & Dement, 1991; Partch et al., 2014), the circadian rhythm in core temperature (Racinais et al., 2004, 2005; Racinais & Oksa, 2010; Taylor et al., 2011), and diurnal variation of circadian clock genes (Douglas et al., 2021). For example, evoked responses from the quadriceps muscles have shown greater twitch torque and rates of twitch torque development in the evening versus the morning (Guette et al., 2005b; Martin et al., 1999). The role of core body temperature is important too as diurnal differences are diminished in warm environments (Racinais et al., 2004) and following extended warmups (Taylor et al., 2011). The increase in maximal muscle strength that occurs with slight elevations (1°C) in central body temperature (Racinais et al., 2004, 2005; Racinais & Oksa, 2010) has been attributed to enhanced contractile kinetics and greater muscle fiber conduction velocity (Shephard, 1984). More recently the discovery of skeletal muscle clock genes has revealed the existence of rhythmic pathways in human skeletal muscle that affect approximately 8% of muscle genes (Dyar et al., 2014). The data show the transcription of human skeletal muscle clock genes enriched genes associated with inflammation, immune responses, myofilament phosphorylation, and mitochondrial activity (Dyar et al., 2014), thus influencing time‐of‐day differences in maximal isometric muscle force (Partch et al., 2014; Takashima, 2009). More research is needed on the role that skeletal muscle clock genes may have on altering diurnal muscle performance, but it remains a potential mechanism for time‐of‐day alterations seen in the present study (Douglas et al., 2021; Vaara et al., 2018). Force steadiness A novel finding of the present study relates to the sex difference in force steadiness for the knee extensors. This topic has received attention lately and the current data offers new insights. Our findings show that at 30% of maximal isometric force, there were small, nonsignificant effects for lower force steadiness for females compared to males for the elbow flexors in the morning (g = 0.303) and evening (g = 0.396). However, the force steadiness during knee extension was influenced by sex and time of day. More specifically, males showed improvements in force steadiness from morning to evening and the magnitude of force variability in the evening was significantly lower than the females. To our knowledge, there is no other data examining force steadiness in the morning versus the evening, so interpretations are challenging. However, in a thorough review, Jakobi et al. (2018) outline several factors that should be considered when interpreting sex‐based differences in force steadiness. The size and type of motor units, the firing behavior of the active motor units, agonist versus antagonist control, absolute muscle strength, and tendon properties. Of these, recent motor unit recordings during steady contractions show evidence of greater coefficients of variation of the inter‐pulse interval of the motor unit firings and greater incidence of doublet discharges across a range of intensities in the tibialis anterior muscle in females compared to males (Inglis & Gabriel, 2021). Although the present data is without motor unit recordings, it is nonetheless intriguing that sex‐based differences in force steadiness were more pronounced in the evening than the morning and for the lower than the upper limb. These findings may lend support to the influence of diurnal catecholamine releases on motor neuron firing properties (Pereira et al., 2015) and the size of the active motor units on force steadiness (Brown et al., 2010; Harwood et al., 2010; Jakobi et al., 2018). Sex comparisons A major aim of this study was to determine if time‐of‐day changes in neuromuscular performance are influenced by sex. A recent meta‐analysis shows that of the research examining time‐of‐day effects on short‐term performance, approximately 10% of subjects are female (Mirizio et al., 2020). Since females exhibit a relatively greater flux of the gonadal steroid hormones (Bailey & Silver, 2014), it was reasoned that this may influence the diurnal pattern of neuromuscular function. The present findings of sex differences in force steadiness in the evening for the knee extensors indicate that diurnal variation between males and females may present during submaximal, not maximal tasks. In contrast to our hypothesis, the data generally indicate greater variability between morning and evening for males compared to females. Sex differences in gonadal steroid hormone receptor density in the suprachiasmatic nucleus as well as its major afferent pathways are shown in animal models (Bailey & Silver, 2014; Kuljis et al., 2013). These observations represent a direct mechanism for sex‐based differences in diurnal variation, yet the paucity of data in both animals and humans render limited speculations on the functional outcomes that may result (Bailey & Silver, 2014; Kuljis et al., 2013). Limitations Certain limitations should be noted. In the present study, participants were not matched into groups based on their respective diurnal chronotypes, there was no assessment of participant arousal levels, and neurohormonal data was not collected. For the female group, the menstrual cycle phase in which testing occurred was standardized within but not between participants. Although menstrual phase has shown little influence on maximal force (Ansdell et al., 2019) the potential heterogeneity from phase‐specific time‐of‐day effects (Bambaeichi et al., 2004; Birch & Reilly, 2002), hormonal contraceptive use, and contraceptive types within our female sample may have introduced variance that should be considered. Despite within‐participant maximal EMG comparisons, it is important to emphasize that our EMG measurements were not normalized to the compound muscle action potential, but to the maximal isometric contraction which limits mechanistic interpretations of peripheral‐central contributions. However, the EMG rise data were normalized to the maximal EMG amplitude values. Lastly, the inability to measure evoked twitch properties also limits the peripheral interpretations that may explain the present force data.