Discussion In this study, the mechanisms underlying parental asymmetric chromatin dynamics were investigated, which revealed that it is determined by parental pronuclear competitive mechanisms. Sperm can reduce histone mobility of both parental PNs (Fig. 1a–h). The abilities to promote and resist the reduction of histone mobility are acquired during spermiogenesis (Figs. 1i, j and 3d). In addition to the sperm-derived ability to reduce histone mobility, oocytes also harbor factors that promote histone mobility, which the parental PNs compete for in zygotes (Fig. 2a–d). Notably, this competition is critical to the establishment of parental asymmetric chromatin dynamics (Fig. 2e–g) and parental asymmetric transcriptional activity (Fig. 3a, b). Hereafter, this power balance is referred to as parental epigenetic competition. It is probably that the differences in the dynamics of the parental PN formation process are involved in the regulation of parental epigenetic competition as a main underlying mechanism. The establishment of the chromatin structure of the sp-mPN is very distinct from that of the fPN. Within 1 h of fertilization, maternally pooled histone proteins are rapidly incorporated into the sp-mPN, resulting in the sperm head becoming decondensed and expanded27,28. At this phase, maternal genetic materials still form completely condensed meiotic chromosomes, which are located in the cytoplasm or the going to be extruded second polar body (Fig. 2f)29. Also, it is widely thought that the transcription factors and chromatin remodeling factors dissociate from the condensed chromosomes and are re-recruited to the re-organized chromatin structure after chromosome segregation30. Therefore, it is likely that maternal factors were first taken up by the sp-mPN and then later by the fPN. In 1 h-delayed ICSI-zygotes, the asymmetric histone mobility of the parental chromatin structure was reversed (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Fig. 12). This experiment was designed to collapse the competition for the maternally supplied factors from the ooplasm and resulted in the reversal of the parental asymmetry. Thus, it is possible that more maternally pooled or newly produced zygotic factors were incorporated into the sp-mPN than the fPN in normally fertilized zygotes. Indeed, more reprogramming factors that confer totipotency to the somatic cell nuclei and key transcriptional factors at this stage (e.g., SP1) are reportedly incorporated into the sp-mPN than the fPN5,31. Accordingly, it is plausible that more maternally supplied histone mobility-promoting factors could be incorporated into the sp-mPN than the fPN, resulting in asymmetric dynamics of the parental chromatin. In addition, changing the fertilization timing was sufficient to reverse the parental asymmetry regardless of the paternal repressive effects on chromatin dynamics suggests that the primary mechanism underlying parental asymmetry is the paternal PN having the advantage to start incorporating the chromatin dynamics promoting factors first. And paternal repressive effects have supporting roles to enhance this asymmetry (Fig. 3e). In 1PN-ICSI-zygotes, the sp-mPN demonstrated slower histone mobility than the 1PN-ROSI, and 1PN-spt-partheno (Fig. 1f and Supplementary Fig. 3a). This result indicated that sperm actively reduced the chromatin dynamics. In Fig. 1i and Supplementary Fig. 6, although NaOH-treated inactivated sperm lost the ability to activate the oocyte, the ability to reduce histone mobility was retained, indicating that the unidentified sperm-derived chromatin dynamics reducing factors are not associated with the sperm surface. A recent broadly accepted theory states that sperm are more than mere vehicles to carry the paternal haploid genome into the oocyte. Indeed, sperm carried huge kinds of RNA into oocytes at fertilization. Several studies showed that during epididymal transit from the testis to the cauda epididymis; sperm obtained a small RNA payload12,32. Since tICSI-zygotes, which have no such RNA payload, exhibit parental asymmetric chromatin dynamics, the RNA payload of the mature sperm might not be involved in the decreasing histone mobility of the zygotic chromatin. However, the possibility that sperm RNA is involved in the paternal repressive effect on the chromatin structure must still be considered. Reportedly, sperm RNA is deeply embedded in the sperm head33. Such RNA is not easy to extract, and NaOH treatment did not completely dissolve the sperm head, indicating that the RNA was not eliminated34. In addition to the embedded RNA, proteins are possibly the responsible factors. Following the initiation of spermiogenesis, during which there is no transcription, specific stored RNAs were translated to proteins19. Since our results indicated that the ability of sperm to reduce histone mobility is acquired after the initiation of spermiogenesis, it is also possible that newly synthesized proteins at this phase are responsible for the reduction of histone mobility. To understand the importance and mechanisms of parental epigenetic competition, further studies are needed to test this hypothesis and identify the RNA and/or protein molecules responsible for zygotic chromatin dynamics. Round spermatids do not harbor the ability to reduce histone mobility (Fig. 1f and Supplementary Fig. 3a). Moreover, when compared, in 1PN-zygotes, rs-mPNs and fPNs, which are derived from transferred meiotic spindles, exhibited the same level of histone mobility. However, there was significant asymmetric histone mobility of the parental PNs in ROSI-zygotes (Fig. 1i, Supplementary Fig. 6). Our ROSI-zygote production strategy employed a post-activation protocol35 to improve the rate of 2PN formation6. In this protocol, the oocytes injected with round spermatids were activated within 30 min after ROSI. As a result, the round spermatid genome was able to avoid premature chromatin condensation followed by extrusion of the pseudo polar body. Thus, chromosome condensation and incorporation of maternal factors did not seem to be equal between the rs-mPN and fPN, suggesting the possibility that the rs-mPN harbored more histone mobility-promoting factors than the fPN. Collectively, these findings suggest that it is probable that the differences in dynamics during PN formation contribute to the parental epigenetic competition. The results of this study indicated that the sperm or sp-mPN exerted an ability to reduce histone mobility in both parental PNs. This finding raises the question of the biological significance of the reduction of zygotic chromatin dynamics by sperm. Bui et al.36 reported that sperm have the ability to regulate transcriptional activity. Thus, sperm play an important role in the regulation of zygotic genome activation (ZGA). The reduction of histone mobility by sperm might be involved in the regulation of ZGA. It was thought that promiscuous transcription occurs during minor ZGA and correlates with extensive chromatin dynamics by FRAP37. Our results demonstrated that sperm-derived repressive factors condense the paternal chromatin structure in the sp-mPN and then the extent of histone mobility becomes comparable to that of the rs-mPN, indicating that in the absence of sperm-derived chromatin condensing factors, the paternal chromatin structure derived from the sperm should be extremely dynamic. Then, it is possible that such an extreme chromatin dynamics will cause abnormalities to the transcriptome during ZGA. To assess this possibility, the repressive factors must be identified with the use of a knockdown/knockout experimental system, which was not possible in the current study.