Methods Bacterial strains The cereulide producing reference strain F4810/72 [42] was used to determine the sequence of the complete cereulide synthetase locus and the sequence of flanking regions. Cells were grown on plate count (PC) agar plates or in LB (Luria-Bertani) medium at 30°C. Escherichia coli strains used for subcloning were grown at 37°C in LB medium with the appropriate antibiotics. Details on the origin of B. cereus group strains used to test the occurrence of the ces genes in hybridization studies are provided in Table S1 (see additional files). Sequencing strategies Due to stability problems with clones from a cosmid library, the sequence of the total cereulide synthetase operon and its flanking regions was determined by inverse PCR and module jumping as described previously [22]. The latter sequencing strategy took advantage of highly conserved core motifs in NRPS genes which have been successfully used to design degenerated primers and amplify novel NRPS modules [20,43]. With the combination of a specific primer located in the known sequence and a degenerated primer located in a core motif in a putative flanking module, additional sequence information can be gained by "jumping" from one module to the next one, see e.g. [22]. Organization of the ces gene cluster was confirmed by direct sequencing of the antisense strand from genomic DNA. In addition, primers derived from genomic sequences of the B. anthracis pXO1 toxin plasmid and the B. cereus ATCC 10987 pBc10987 plasmid were used to obtain sequence information from flanking regions of the cereulide synthetase operon. DNA was prepared using the AquaPure Genomic DNA Isolation-Kit (Bio-Rad, Germany). For inverse PCR total chromosomal DNA was isolated by phenol-chloroform extraction as described previously [43]. Preparation of plasmid DNA was performed according to standard procedures [44]. Sequences of degenerated primers successfully used for module jumping are listed in Table 1. Amplicons from module jumping were subcloned in TOPO TA vectors according to the manufacturer's recommendation (Invitrogen, USA) and sequenced as described previously [22]. PCR amplification products obtained with primers predicted from plasmids of B. cereus group members and PCR products obtained by inverse PCR were either subcloned in TOPO TA or directly sequenced by using a BigDye Terminator v1.1 Cycle Sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems). Sequence analysis The sequencing analysis software package Vector NTI (Informax Inc., U.S.A.) was used to generate the contig sequence from the sequenced PCR products obtained by PCR, inverse PCR and module jumping and the resulting sequence was searched against the sequenced genomes of B. cereus group members. Sequence similarity searches were performed using the Basic Local Aligment Search Tools BLASTX and BLASTP on the NCBI website [45,46]. The software packages ClustalX and TREECON were used for sequence alignments and cluster analysis [47,48]. Substrate specificity of ces genes was assessed according to Stachelhaus et al; [26]. The terminator search tool [49] available at Heidelberg Unix Sequence Analysis Resources [50] and Mfold [51], available at the Macfarlane Burnet Center's internet site [51], were used for the prediction of termination sequences. Hybridization assays For hybridization studies chromosomal DNA was isolated with the Puregene DNA isolation kit (Gentra, USA) according to the manufacturer's instruction and blotted onto nitrocellulose using a Milliblot-S slot blot manifold (Millipore, USA). Hybridization was performed using digoxigenin-labelled probes (Roche) directed against the different modules of ces, genes flanking the ces locus and selected pXO1 CDSs. The probes were obtained from the emetic reference strain F4810/72 and B. anthracis CIPA2 (provided by Gilles Vernaud, Orsay, France) and B. anthracis 6–87 (provided by Ulrich Busch, Oberschleissheim, Germany) by PCR using the oligonucleotide primers described in Table S2 (see additional files). Optimal hybridization temperature for each probe was calculated and hybridization was carried out according to recommendations of the manufacturer (Roche, Germany). After hybridization, membranes were washed twice for 15 min in 2 × SSC containing 0.1% SDS at room temperature and two times 15 min in 0.1 × SSC containing 0.1% SDS at 65°C. Detection was performed by enzyme immunoassay according to recommendation of manufacture (Roche, Germany) with the chemiluminescence CDP-Star AP substrate (Novagen, USA). Pulse field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) Preparation of total genomic DNA in agarose plugs was performed as described by Kolsto et al., [52]. Electrophoresis was performed using a CHEF DR III System (Bio-Rad) with a 0.8% SeaKem Gold Agarose gel (Cambrex Bio Science, USA) in 0.25 × TBE buffer (25 mM Tris-borate buffer pH 8, 0.05 mM EDTA) at 15°C with a pulse of 5–200 s for 20 hours. Size of the fragments was estimated using lambda concatamers (Bio-Rad) and Salmonella Braenderup Global Standard (PulseNet) H9812 (XbaI digested). After electrophoresis, gels were stained in 100 μg/ml ethidium bromide for 30 min and destained in water for 1 h. Gels were denaturated in 0.25 M HCl for 15 min, followed by soaking the gel in 1.5 M NaCl/0.5 N NaOH with constant agitation for 2 × 30 min. Neutralization was performed in 0.5 M Tris (pH 8)/1.5 M NaCl for 2 × 30 min. Gels were blotted overnight by capillary transfer in 20 × SSC onto Hybond-N+ nitrocellulose membrane (Amersham Biosciences, UK). After blotting, the membranes were rinsed in 6 × SSC, air dried for 30 min at room temperature and finally baked for 2 h at 80°C. Hybridization was performed as described above. Nucleotide sequence accession number The nucleotide sequence from pBCE4810 of B. cereus F4810/72 described in this paper has been submitted to GenBank under accession no. DQ360825.