Materials and methods Yeast strains and reagents Yeast strains and primers used are listed in Supplementary Table S2. YAP1 C-terminal tagging with EGFP and gene deletion strains were constructed as described (31,32). Chemicals were commercially obtained from the following: Cayman Chemical (Thiolutin), Gold Biotechnology (DTT, TCEP, 5FOA), Sigma (MnCl2), JT Baker (ZnCl2), BDH Chemicals (MgCl2). Variomics screens Two separate pools of diploid Variomics libraries were gifts from Dr Xuewen Pan: one for non-essential and the other for essential genes (33). The pooled diploid Variomics libraries were grown, sporulated and selected for haploid Variomics libraries as described (33). Haploid Variomics libraries were subsequently used for the genetic screens. To convert the Variomics libraries into plasmid-free deletion libraries, pooled Variomics libraries (diploid for essential genes and haploid for non-essential genes) were grown in liquid SC media and plated on SC + 5FOA plates to select against the mutants with the URA3 plasmids containing the Variomics mutations. The diversity of the libraries were confirmed by deep sequencing of barcodes (‘uptags’ and ‘downtags’) flanking the deletion cassettes. For manual screening of variomics libraries, about 1–3 × 107 cells were plated on SC + 10 μg/ml thiolutin plates, and putative thiolutin resistant candidates were restruck on SC + 10 μg/ml thiolutin plates to validate the resistance. Plasmids from validated resistant candidates were subsequently recovered for Sanger sequencing to identify putative resistance-conferring variants. We subsequently tested dominance for the repeatedly isolated candidates. The recovered plasmids from all reproducibly isolated candidates were transformed into the wild-type (CKY457) strain, and thiolutin sensitivity for transformants was phenotyped and compared to the empty vector control. For high-throughput screens, Variomics libraries were screened on plates, while deletion libraries were screened in liquid, as previously described (25,26,33), and three independent screens (biological replicates) were performed. For Variomics screens, each library was screened on SC-URA + DMSO, SC-URA + 8 μg/ml thiolutin or SC-URA + 10 μg/ml thiolutin plates. Each biological replicate was screened on 9 plates (6 × 107 cells/plate) for 3 days, and cells were scraped to screen for an additional set of 9 plates for 3 days (6 × 107 cells/plate). Deletion libraries were grown in liquid SC media to 3 × 107 cells/ml and diluted in SC + 3 μg/ml thiolutin (for haploid non-essential gene deletion library) or SC + 4 μg/ml thiolutin (for diploid essential gene deletion library) to grow for 20 generations. During the selection, the cells were diluted to 1 × 106 cells/ml every five generations to maintain cultures in log phase. For both screens, yeast cells were pooled, and genomic DNA was prepared using a YeaStar Genomic DNA kit (Zymo Research) for subsequent PCR amplification of barcode regions. Amplicons were sequenced by illumina Hiseq2500 in rapid mode. The sequencing reads are deposited in the SRA under the Bioproject PRJNA725683. Bar-seq data processing Sequencing reads are mapped to the re-annotated barcode sequences (25) using Bowtie2 (34) (version 2.2.4) with the -N flag set to 0 and the –no-unal flag to suppress unaligned reads for further analyses. Bowtie2 outputs were written into SAM format and further extracted using Samtools (version 1.3.1) (35). Barcode sequences shorter than 15nts or that were mapped to multiple reference barcodes were discarded. On average, 98% of sequencing reads were uniquely mapped. As with Robinson et al. (36), we filtered out barcodes with lower than 100 total reads across all samples, since low count barcodes across all conditions were likely from sequencing errors and did not exist. In addition, mutants with less than 20 reads in both treated and the corresponding untreated controls were further filtered out, to exclude large changes from a small amount of reads with low confidence. Following Robinson et al. (36), we added 1 pseudo-count to each barcode count to avoid division by 0, and performed TMM normalization using the edgeR package (version 3.12.1) (37). For differential abundance analyses, we used edgeR to compute mutant specific dispersions, P-value and log transformed abundance changes using exactTest function (default setting). The transformed data were subsequently subjected to differential abundance analyses and clustering analyses. Differential abundance analyses were performed independently for the uptag and downtag sequences, and reproducibility between uptag and downtag data was assessed with Pearson correlation in R. Hierarchical clustering of the thiolutin phenotypic profile to an existing drug response profile for yeast mutants, consisting of 3356 compounds (26) was performed in Cluster 3.0 (38), using centered correlation and complete linkage. Mutants with significantly altered abundance (P< 0.01) were subjected to gene-ontology (GO) analyses as previously reported (26). In brief, all three GO categories, including biological processes (BP), Molecular Function (MF) and Cellular components (CC), were included in our analyses. Following the previous report (26), BP and MF GO terms that are too specific (present in less than 5 genes) or too generic (present in >300 genes) were excluded, although smaller GO term groups were allowed for protein complexes (>2 genes) and larger groups (>300 genes) were allowed for cellular components. We computed the GO term enrichment analyses for the significantly resistant or sensitive mutants (P< 0.01) using hypergeometric test in R (version 3.2.2, physer function, default setting). Raw counts and P-value for each GO term were reported. A series of quality controls were performed on the reproducibility among biological replicates, consistency between the two barcodes on each gene deletion (uptag and downtag) for the same strain, common and distinct properties between Variomics and Deletion libraries following a well-established statistical analysis pipeline. A subset of the statistically significant resistant or sensitive mutants were further validated by re-constructing the deletion strain for individual phenotyping. Visualization of Yap1 localization under fluorescence microscopy Microscopy experiments were performed as previously described (39). In brief, CKY2038 was grown to mid-log (1–2 × 107 cells/ml) in SC liquid media and added to the ConA treated perfusion chamber gasket (ThermoFisher, 4 chamber: 19 × 6mm) for treatment at indicated conditions (SC + 1% DMSO, SC + 10 μg/ml Thiolutin, SC + 10 μg/ml Holomycin or SC + 0.4 mM H2O2) under the fluorescence microscope. The procedure to prepare the chamber and the microscope setting were the same as previously described. Glutathione quantitation assays WT yeast (CKY457) cultures were grown (in YPD at 30°C) until mid-log phase (∼2 × 107 cells/ml), washed and resuspended in the indicated conditions (YPD + 1% DMSO, YPD + 10 μg/ml Thiolutin or YPD + 10μg/ml Holomycin). The suspended cultures were grown at 30°C for one hour, and 5 × 107/ml cells were subject to glutathione (GSH) quantitation. The active and total GSH levels were quantified using the GSH detection kit from Arbor Assays (K006-F5) following the manual. The glutathione disulfide (GSSG) level was calculated by (Total GSH - Active GSH)/2. UV-vis assays Thiolutin reduction and Zn2+ chelation reactions were performed in 250 μl reactions with 50 μM Thiolutin, 50 μM ZnCl2 and 100 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH = 6.5), as previously described (1). Mn2+ chelation reactions and relevant controls were performed under almost identical conditions except for the 100 mM Tris buffer (pH = 8) to keep consistent pH with the in vitro transcription assays. Each reaction had 250 μl final volume and was quantified in Nanodrop 2000c spectrophotometer using UV-transparent cuvettes. Growth, viability and canavanine resistance assays Phenotyping of mutants using plate assays were performed as previously described, with indicated addition of chemicals (40,41). Yeast liquid growth curve assays with Tecan Infinite F200 plate readers were performed as previously described (39). For viability assays and canavanine resistance assays, WT yeast strain CKY457 was grown in YPD until mid-log (1–2 × 107 cells/ml), washed and treated with the indicated conditions (YPD, YPD + 3 μg/ml thiolutin, YPD + 5μg/ml thiolutin and YPD + 10μg/ml thiolutin) for an hour. The viability was quantified by staining the yeast cells in 0.1% Trypan blue staining (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Catalog Number SV30084.01) for 3 min, and the viability was quantified by counting the fraction of unstained yeast cells under the microscope. At least 300 yeast cells were counted in each repeat. Canavanine resistance frequency was quantified by plating the culture onto YPD and SC-Arg + 60 μg/ml canavanine plates and dividing the number of canavanine resistant colonies by the number of viable colonies on YPD plates. Three experimental replicates were performed. Pol II transcription activity assays Pol II was purified using a strain expressing Rpb3 tagged with tandem-affinity tag (TAP), following a procedure as previously described (42). For initiation experiments DTT was removed from the Pol II buffer prior to the assay using Zeba spin desalting column (Thermo Scientific), though in later experiments this was found to be unnecessary. Standard ssDNA transcription assays were performed in the in vitro transcription buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl pH8, 40 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2). Each reaction had ∼0.5 pmol Pol II, 2 μg denatured sheared salmon sperm DNA as the template and 200 μM NTPs except 9 μM cold NTP for labeling with that species (UTP or CTP), 1 μM radioactive α-32P UTP or CTP (800 Ci/mmol, Perkin-Elmer) as substrates. The concentration of thiolutin, reductants (DTT or TCEP) and MnCl2 varies among the experiments (indicated in each figure). In general, 5 μl pre-treatment reactions including DMSO or thiolutin (at 2× final treatment concentration, from 7.5 μg/ml to 60 μg/ml in DMSO), +/– MnCl2 at specified concentration, and DTT (1–2× molar equivalent to thiolutin) were composed and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. To these reactions Pol II was added (with or without pre-binding to DNA) in an equal volume of 2X transcription buffer, yielding 10 μl reactions in 1× transcription buffer for thiolutin treatment. These reactions were incubated for 20 min at room temperature. Transcription was initiated by addition of 5 μl DNA/NTP (or just NTP mix in case of DNA pretreatment) and incubated at room temperature for 30 min and stopped with stop buffer (10 M urea, 5 mM EDTA in TBE). DTT reversal of thiolutin inhibition was accomplished by adding 2 μl 60 mM DTT to 8 μl Pol II treatment reaction at the end of the 20 min treatment, prior to addition of NTPs/DNA. Transcripts were separated from unincorporated α-32P NTPs on 10% acrylamide/7 M urea/TBE gels and visualized with a Bio-Rad Pharos Phosphorimager or GE Typhoon Imager. In vitro transcription elongation assays were performed as previously described (42), with modifications of time shown in the figure. 5 μl reactions comprising 5 pmol Pol II, 40 μg/ml thiolutin in DMSO or DMSO alone, 875 μM MnCl2, equimolar DTT to thiolutin, 1× transcription buffer, and 3.75 μg BSA were incubated for 20 min at room temperature and then incubated with 2.5 μl annealed transcription scaffold as described. After 5 min, non-template strand was added for an additional 5 min incubation. Thiolutin-treated Pol II + scaffold was then diluted with additional 1× transcription buffer, MnCl2, thiolutin, while untreated Pol II + scaffold was diluted with thiolutin containing buffer (made fresh) or control buffer with DMSO. After 20 additional minutes at room temperature, reactions proceeded exactly as described in (42). ChIP-qPCR and ChIP-seq (RPB3::3XFLAG::kanMX4) subunit of Pol II was used for chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). For in vivo elongation assays, Pol II occupancy over a constitutive promoter-driven reporter (TEF1p::YLR454W) was determined after treating the cells with thiolutin. Yeast were grown in SC media to mid-log (1 × 107 cells/ml) and treated with 10 μg/ml thiolutin for 2, 4, 8 or 10 min (ChIP-qPCR) or for 1, 2, 4 or 8 min (ChIP-seq), cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde solution (1% formaldehyde, 10 mM NaCl, 100 μM EDTA and 5 mM HEPES–KOH, pH 7.5) for 20 min and quenched by 3 M glycine (final concentration 360 mM) for 5 min. ChIP-qPCR was performed as described previously (39). In brief, cross-linked cells were disrupted by bead beating and cell lysate was centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 1 min at 4°C to remove cell-debris, followed by centrifugation of chromatin pellets, subsequent washing of pellets (twice) with 1 ml FA buffer (50 mM HEPES–KOH pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.01% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS and 1 mM PMSF) at 14 000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. Chromatin for ChIP-seq was washed one additional time in special FA buffer lacking SDS and sodium deoxycholate. Chromatin pellets were sonicated using a Diagenode Bioruptor (ChIP-qPCR, 45 cycles–3 × 15 cycles; 30 s ON/45 s OFF) or a Diagenode Bioruptor Pico (ChIP-seq, 20 cycles; 30 s ON/30–50 s OFF) and used for IP with anti-FLAG antibody (FLAG M2 magnetic beads, Sigma-Aldrich). For ChIP-seq, 1100 μg of chromatin material as determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher) was used for each IP with addition of 110 μg S. pombe spike-in chromatin from CKP025 (h- ura4-D18 rpb3+::6gly-3Flag-ura4+). Concentration of SDS in IP for ChIP-seq after addition of S. pombe chromatin was 0.1% and concentration of sodium deoxycholate was 0.01%. SDS and sodium deoxycholate were omitted from all washes for ChIP-seq IPs as they reduce efficiency of FLAG M2 antibody (MilliporeSigma). 10% of the total IP material was used as input. Input or immunoprecipitated DNA was purified by standard phenol–chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitated with pellet paint (MilliporeSigma) or glycoblue (ThermoFisher). Immunoprecipitated DNA and 10% of corresponding input DNA (1:10 diluted) were used for qPCR with SsoAdvanced Universal SYBR Green supermix (Bio-Rad) using CFX 96 (Bio-Rad). Pol II fold enrichment was determined by the delta CT method. ChIP-seq library preparation Libraries for ChIP-seq were prepared with NEBNext Ultra II DNA Library kit (NEB) according to the manufacturer's instructions with the following modifications. Starting DNA for ChIP or input samples was 10 ng. Index primers were from NEBNext Multiplex Oligos for Illumina Dual Index Primer Set 1 and were diluted 1/2.5 before use. Library amplification during indexing amplification was between 6–8 cycles Samples were sequenced (paired-end) on an Illumina NextSeq 2000 P2 flow cell. ChIP-seq analysis Paired-end raw fastq files were first trimmed for TruSeq3-PE-2 adaptors using Trimmomatic 0.38 (43) to remove adaptor readthrough. FastQC was used for quality control analysis. Adapter-trimmed fastq were then aligned to a hybrid genome combining S. cerevisiae and S. pombe genomes using bowtie2/2.4.5 (34), allowing 1 mismatch and disallowing insert size >1000 (‘bowtie2 -q -N 1 -X 1000 –x’). The hybrid genome was generated by combining S. cerevisiae genome version R64-3-1 with S. pombe genome 2018-9-4, after appending a suffix of ‘pom_’ to S. pombe chromosomes to allow reads mapping to S. pombe to be filtered later. Sam files generated from bowtie2 alignment were then converted to bam, which were then sorted and indexed using bamtools. Duplicates were then removed by picard 2.8.12, followed by indexing of newly generated bam files. Subsequent to duplicate removal, reads aligned to hybrid genome were segregated into separate species-specific (S. cerevisiae or S. pombe) input or IP bam files (‘samtools idxstats < non_duplicated-hybrid.bam> | cut -f 1 | grep -v ‘pom_’ | xargs samtools view -b < non_duplicated-hybrid.bam> > <output_S.ce.bam>’; ‘samtools idxstats < non_duplicated-hybrid.bam> | cut -f 1 | grep ‘pom_’ | xargs samtools view -b < non_duplicated-hybrid.bam> > <output_pombe.bam>’). Bams were then indexed using samtools/1.14 (35). This segregation of species-specific reads allows counting species specific reads in both input and IP bam files for normalization factor quantification. Total number of unique reads (samtools flag -F 260) per bam file of S. cerevisiae and S. pombe were counted for both input and IP data for calculating normalization factor combining input and spike-in reads, using an R script. The normalization factor was estimated following method of : (INPUT_Sp_Counts/100000000)/((Sp_Counts/100000000) * (INPUT_Sc_Counts/100000000)) (44). These factors were then used to scale the S.cerevisiae IP bams to generate scaled or normalized bigwigs using bamCoverage function of deeptools/3.3.0. Wiggletools/1.2.11 (45,46) was then used to generate mean bedgraphs of three replicates which were then converted to mean bigwigs using bedGraphtoBigWig of kentutils/v.370 (47). Differential bigwigs were generated by log2 operation function of bigwigCompare under the deeptools/3.3.0 package which were then used for generating heatmaps (46). 1H-NMR characterization of thiolutin reduction and metal binding Thiolutin stock solution for NMR experiments was freshly prepared by dissolving thiolutin in DMSO-d6. Thiolutin reduction study was performed using freshly prepared DTT in an NMR tube at the final sample concentrations of 1.5 mM thiolutin, 7.5 mM DTT, 15 mM Tris (pH = 8.0) and 10% D2O. 1H-NMR spectra were collected immediately using 500 MHz Bruker Avance II spectrometer at 25°C. For Zn2+ and Mn2+ chelation experiments, Zn2+ or Mn2+ were added at a final concentration of 7.5 mM 1 min after thiolutin reduction by DTT and were incubated at room temperature for 2 min before the acquisition of 1H-NMR spectra.