Materials and methods For basic statistics on the G1034 genomes, please refer to Supplementary Table S1. Biological resources: isolation, growth and DNA extraction of the NBC collection Soil samples were collected by digging approximately 7–10 cm below the surface and placing a small scoop of soil into plastic bags or 50 ml Falcon tubes. Once back in the lab, the samples were stored at 4°C for a maximum of 3 weeks before processing. Detailed metadata of the samples can be found in the individual BioSample records. To isolate actinomycete strains, we mixed 1 g of soil with 3 ml 6% yeast extract, incubated the sample in a 60°C water bath for 20 min, and then diluted this mixture 1:49 with sterile water. We then spread 200 μl of this dilution onto three types of agar media : ISP4, Actinomycete Isolation Agar Media (AIM) with Avicel, and AIM with xylose in 94 × 16 mm petri dishes containing approximately 25 ml of agar media. Actinomycete Isolation Agar, Avicel PH-101 and d-xylose were all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and ISP4 was purchased from Becton Dickinson (Difco). AIM-Avicel contained 22 g/l AIM and 10 g/l Avicel. Similarly, AIM-xylose contained 22 g/l AIM and 10 g/l xylose. ISP4 was used at the recommended concentration. No antifungal compounds or inhibitors against Gram-negative bacteria were used since the carbon sources of the three media (ISP4: starch, Avicel: cellulose and xylose) selectively enrich for Actinomycetes. The plates were incubated at 30°C. Fast-growing fungi that appeared after two or three days incubation were removed by cutting out the section of agar on which they grew. After 5, 10, 15 and 20 days incubation, we picked single colonies based on colony morphology, trying to avoid colonies with similar morphologies from each soil sample. The colonies were restreaked onto ISP2 plates (BD Difco). Actinomycetes have a distinct morphology with aerial mycelia. The colonies are often wrinkly or bumpy and sometimes colorful. In addition, actinomycete colonies are nearly always solid such that intact pieces break off when probed with a toothpick. Actinomycetes do not have the same amorphous morphology that bacteria such as E. coli and B. subtilis have. The ISP2 plates were again incubated at 30°C. Once actinomycete growth was observed on the ISP2 plates, a chunk of the bacteria was lifted from the agar and placed into triple-baffled flasks containing ISP2 liquid media. The cultures were incubated at 30°C with shaking. After robust growth, an aliquot was mixed 1:1 with 50% glycerol to make frozen stocks, which were stored at −80°C. A detailed description of the growth conditions and DNA extraction protocol can be found in the protocol Alvarez-Arevalo, M. et al. (18). Briefly, strains were grown in liquid ISP2 or YEME medium in baffled flasks at 30°C with constant stirring. Then the cells were harvested and washed with PBS, and DNA extracted with a modified Qiagen Genomic Tip 20 protocol. For strains with an aggregated growth pattern, physical shearing in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle was applied. The concentration, purity, and amount of short DNA fragments of the resulting purified DNA was evaluated with Qubit BR dsDNA, nanodrop, and 0.7% agarose gel electrophoresis. The length of DNA fragments using this method is generally around 50 000 bp (18). Samples with many short DNA fragments were further purified using either the Short Read Eliminator kit (PacBio, San Diego, CA, USA), or 0.4–0.5× volume KAPA PURE SPRI beads (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Illumina sequencing Illumina data was either generated in-house on an Illumina NextSeq500 with the KAPA HyperPlus protocol (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), or at Novogene Inc (Beijing, China) on an Illumina Novaseq machine with the libraries either prepared using the NEBNext® Ultra™ II DNA Library Prep Kit or the Novogene NGS DNA Prep Set kit, both latter using a special 6 PCR cycle protocol to minimize GC bias in the sequencing results. All libraries were sequenced using 2 × 150 nt paired end sequencing kits. Raw illumina reads were trimmed with Trim Galore v0.6.4_dev (20) in paired mode with the minimum length set to 100 bp and the quality cutoff set to Q20. Nanopore sequencing Nanopore sequencing was performed on the Nanopore MinION platform, using v9.4.1 flowcells with either the SQK-RBK004 or SQK-RBK110-96 kit, both of which are transposase based. Eight to 16 strains were pooled per run, and flowcells were generally washed and reused after 24H, making sure to use the barcodes only for the same strains on subsequent runs. The protocol was modified as described in Alvarez-Arevalo et al. (18). Briefly, the DNA to transposase ratio was modified to allow for longer fragments and a post tagmentation size selection was performed to remove small fragments. All basecalling was performed with Guppy (v.5.0.17 + 99baa5b, client-server API version 7.0.0), which also was used for demultiplexing and adapter trimming. Assembly and preliminary analysis The workflow AAA-Actino-Assembly-and-Annotation (v.1.6.7) was used for all assembly and preliminary analysis (DOI10.11583/DTU.25133513). Default parameters were used when not otherwise mentioned. The workflow consists of the following steps: The nanopore reads were assembled using Flye (v.2.9) (21) with the following settings: five polishing iterations and using the –nano-raw switch. The N50 and total number of bases in reads were extracted from the Flye statistics after assembly, and thus represent the dataset used for the assembly. The assembly graphs were manually inspected in Bandage v.0.9.0 (22), and in cases where Flye was unable to completely resolve an unambiguous graph, we applied the simplistic NPGM-contigger (DOI10.11583/DTU.25133828). The topology of each chromosome is reported based on the manual inspection of the repeat graph and of the contigging. In cases where the assembly graph was ambiguous, we first subsampled the dataset using Filtlong (https://github.com/rrwick/Filtlong) to remove the shortest and lowest quality reads according to Supplementary Table S1, and if a complete genome was still not obtained, deposited the genome as the lower contiguity ‘WGS’ rather than ‘chromosome’. Coverage plots of both illumina (Bowtie2 (23)) and nanopore (minimap2 (24)) data mappings were manually inspected for sudden coverage changes to half or double the surrounding area coverage (see Supplementary Figure S1 for coverage plot examples). The coverage plot inspection revealed large scale assembly artifacts of some of the chromosomes, resulting in 11 genomes, which needed to be reassembled after Filtlong removal of half the raw nanopore data. These errors related to the TIRs of Streptomyces genomes. Sequence sanity checks Illumina reads were mapped on the nanopore assembly using Bowtie2 v.2.3.4.3 (23). This sanity check was failed if <60% of illumina reads mapped, and the sample was excluded from further analysis. This step is taken to ensure that the nanopore and illumina datasets come from the same sample. Assembly polishing All genomes were first polished using the nanopore data with the Flye polisher, this includes both samples contigged by Flye and by the NPGM-contigger. A total of five iterations of nanopore read polishing was used. Then, samples were polished with the illumina reads using Polypolish v.0.5.0 (25), and then using POLCA (part of MaSuRCA v.4.0.5 (26)), as described in Wick et al. (25). Gene and functional annotation, phylogenetic placement, assembly quality and antiSMASH annotation Gene and functional annotation was performed at NCBI using the PGAP pipeline. Phylogenetic assignment was done using GTDB-Tk v.1.7.0 (reference data version r202) (27,28), and later verified at NCBI. In the handful of cases where the taxonomic assignment between NCBI and GTDB did not agree, or a genus was differently named, the NCBI assignment was kept in the genbank annotation. For the strain NBC_01635, GTDB-Tk repeatedly failed. However, based on the presence of core genes, the linear chromosome organization with TIRs, and the NCBI classification, this strain was classified as 
Streptomycessp. BUSCO is primarily a tool for evaluating genome completeness and consists of a set of gene model datasets and software to compare the datasets to a sequence of interest. However, we used the BUSCO (29) gene model datasets both to evaluate genome completeness, and to represent different levels of evolutionarily conserved genes. BUSCO (29) uses sets of HMMs of universal (defined as >90% of species) single-copy orthologous genes to estimate the completeness and duplication levels of eu- and prokaryotic genome assemblies. It has become nearly universally adapted for assessing assemblies, and 193 BUSCO datasets currently exist for domain (e.g Bacteria), phylum (e.g. Actinomycetota), class (e.g. Actinomycetia), order (e.g. Streptomycetales), and more classification levels. BUSCO v.5.1.2 (29) with the databases bacteria_odb10 and actinobacteria_class_odb10 was used to estimate the gene placement on the genomes and genome completeness, respectively. AntiSMASH v.7.0.0 (6) was used to predict BGCs with the NCBI PGAP annotation in genbank format as input and the following parameters: –cb-general –cb-subclusters –cb-knownclusters –genefinding-tool none –clusterhmmer –cc-mibig –asf –tigr –pfam2go. Developed tools and additional used bioinformatics methods DnaA flipping For the analysis of complete Streptomyces genomes, all sequences were oriented so that the dnaA gene was in the forward direction using the biopython script (Blin, Kai (2024)). Orienting linear chromosomes by the dnaA gene. Technical University of Denmark. Software. https://doi.org/10.11583/DTU.25662438). In total, 368 genome sequences (49.6%) were reversed and complemented, while 347 (50.4%) were not. Plasmid identification We manually curated a list of 170 plasmid specific PFAM domains (Jørgensen, Tue Sparholt (2024). List of PFAM domains used for plasmid classification. Technical University of Denmark. Online resource. https://doi.org/10.11583/DTU.25662450) and used it to classify extrachromosomal elements as plasmids if any of the plasmid-specific PFAM domains were present. This methodology is similar to a previously developed method and classified 85% of extrachromosomal elements as plasmids (30). The accuracy of this methodology was not experimentally confirmed. Elements without plasmid-like traits were classified as ‘extrachromosomal’. Extracting protoclusters from antiSMASH results The python script used to extract protoclusters from antiSMASH-annotated genbank-files was deposited to Faurdal, David Lokjær (2024). Extracting protocluster table from antiSMASH results. Technical University of Denmark. Software. https://doi.org/10.11583/DTU.25662738 gbk to faa and gff3 For conversion from genbank format file to GFF3, we used bioconvert (31). For conversion from gbk to amino acid fasta, we used the script at https://www.biostars.org/p/151891/ written by Istvan Albert. TIR identification To investigate the size of linear inverted repeats on the 742 Streptomyces linear chromosomes, we performed a BLAST search (32) of the Streptomyces chromosome level chromosomes against itself with the following settings: blastn v2.10.0+, gapopen 2 gapextend 1, hit starting on the first 99 bp of the query and ending on the last 99 bp of the subject to account for end polishing artifacts. Submission to NCBI All raw reads used for assembly, as well as the assemblies, were deposited at NCBI under project number PRJNA747871. Basic statistics For calculating means, medians, quartiles, standard deviations and other basic metrics, GNU datamash was used (https://www.gnu.org/software/datamash/). For calculating the GC %, quast (v.5.2.0) was used (33). Data visualization: kernel density plots To represent each gene and each BGC equally regardless of the length, we used the midpoint position of each gene model or BGC protocluster. This ensures that long and short BGCs have equal weight in the analysis. The Seaborn kernel density estimate plot ‘kdeplot’ was used on core genes, duplicate core genes and protocluster antiSMASH categories and types, respectively, with a smoothing of 0.5 (bw_adjust = .5). This means that the density of each plot is independent, and as such the number of genes or clusters necessary for a certain density is not constant between plots, so they can not be directly compared, however the position (x-axis) is constant and directly comparable between plots. The smoothing value used was chosen as it was found to minimize noise while maintaining clarity, however especially in the distal parts of the chromosome, artifacts are observed as the density will have a tendency to approach 0 even when the data does not show basis of this. As the 742 complete Streptomyces genomes each have 124 bacterial BUSCO gene models, and as the secondary BUSCO copy has been filtered out in their own plot, there are 742 observations for each BUSCO gene model, meaning that the area in the density plot is equal for each gene model, except for two genomes which each had 1 BUSCO gene missing, which means that only 741 observations are available for those two BUSCO gene models. For the duplicate core genes kernel density plot and the antiSMASH category plots, the number of observations of each type vary, and the area of each density is proportional to the number of observations, which can then be compared to each other. However, it is important to repeat that the densities can not be compared between subplots in the kernel density plots. Violin type plots visualize data distributions, with the secondary axis showing the unitless density distribution. Comparison of genome quality with respect to the existing public dataset The genus Streptomyces was the most abundant in the presented dataset and thus was selected for comparison of genome quality with respect to existing datasets in the public repositories. We retrieved 2938 genomes of the Streptomycetaceae family that were present in the NCBI RefSeq database as of 30 June 2023. These genomes were assigned taxonomic definitions according to the GTDB database (28,34). A total of 462 genomes were not assigned to any of the GTDB-defined species. We calculated the MASH (35) distance metric across these genomes to assess the diversity based on whole genome sequence similarity. We used a cutoff of 95% similarity (0.05 MASH-distance) to reconstruct a genome similarity network. To calculate the diversity we used the Louvain community detection algorithm that assigns different communities in the network. These communities are designated as different MASH-based species (Supplementary Table S1). The genomes belonging to the genus Streptomyces were selected for further analysis (Figure 1C). Figure 1.(A) Taxonomy and quality assessment of 2938 Streptomycetaceae genomes and the 1034 actinomycetes genomes from this study. The GTDB assignment showed 3696 of these genomes belonging to the genus Streptomyces in total (middle panel of Sankey diagram). (B) Cumulative number of HQ Streptomyces genomes in the NCBI RefSeq database (as of 30 June 2023). The yellow bar represents the complete or chromosome level assemblies of Streptomyces genomes collected in the present study. The slight difference between the Streptomyces numbers in panel A (501) and B (488) are due to differences in the taxonomic assignment between NCBI and GTDB. (C) Phylogenetic tree of all high quality complete Streptomyces genomes reconstructed using GTDB-Tk de novo method. Colors represent the genomes from either NCBI or this study (with or without GTDB species assignment). The bar chart on the outer ring denote the number of BGCs. (D) Phylogenetic tree of the 1034 genomes presented in this study, reconstructed using GTDB-Tk de novo method. Colors represent select genera, whereas the bar chart on the outer ring denotes genome length. (A) Taxonomy and quality assessment of 2938 Streptomycetaceae genomes and the 1034 actinomycetes genomes from this study. The GTDB assignment showed 3696 of these genomes belonging to the genus Streptomyces in total (middle panel of Sankey diagram). (B) Cumulative number of HQ Streptomyces genomes in the NCBI RefSeq database (as of 30 June 2023). The yellow bar represents the complete or chromosome level assemblies of Streptomyces genomes collected in the present study. The slight difference between the Streptomyces numbers in panel A (501) and B (488) are due to differences in the taxonomic assignment between NCBI and GTDB. (C) Phylogenetic tree of all high quality complete Streptomyces genomes reconstructed using GTDB-Tk de novo method. Colors represent the genomes from either NCBI or this study (with or without GTDB species assignment). The bar chart on the outer ring denote the number of BGCs. (D) Phylogenetic tree of the 1034 genomes presented in this study, reconstructed using GTDB-Tk de novo method. Colors represent select genera, whereas the bar chart on the outer ring denotes genome length. The genomes were classified into three different categories based on the completeness of the assemblies. The complete or chromosome level assemblies were classified as high-quality (HQ), contig or scaffold level assemblies with ≤100 contigs were classified as medium-quality (MQ), whereas rest were low-quality (LQ). We selected the genomes of high-quality to evaluate the progress of sequencing high-quality genomes of the genus Streptomyces over the years and distribution across country of origin (Figures 1A and B, see Supplementary Figure S2 for a list of countries of origin). Phylogenetic tree reconstruction Two different phylogenetic trees were reconstructed here using GTDB-TK (28). The dataset of complete genomes of Streptomyces contained 1230 genomes with 488 genomes from NCBI and 742 from this study. The NBC_01635 genome was assigned to the genus Streptomyces according to NCBI but not GTDB and thus was ignored. The resulting 1229 genomes were processed using GTDB-TK’s de novo tree construction algorithm. Kitasatospora GCF_000269985.1 was used as an outgroup. Another tree was reconstructed using all 1034 genomes presented in this study. For this, Mycobacterium tuberculosis GCF_000195955.2 was used as an outgroup. Tree visualizations were generated using iTOL. For scripts and metadata used to construct the panels in Figure 1, please refer to Mohite, Omkar Satyavan (2024). Metadata for Figure 1. Technical University of Denmark. Online resource. https://doi.org/10.11583/DTU.25663026. Trans-AT PKS BGC mining and analysis In analysis of trans-AT Polyketide Synthase (PKS) BGCs, we initiated our analysis by clustering all BGC regions identified by antiSMASH using the tool BiG-SCAPE (36), with the parameters –cutoff 0.3 –include_singletons –hybrids-off –mibig. This initial clustering utilizes a strict cutoff and does not use the –mix parameters for quick and conservative identification of gene cluster families (GCFs) as proposed previously (37). The nodes in the resulting network were then colored using the predicted compound with highest ranked similarity score against known reference BGCs in the MIBiG database using the ClusterBlast function in antiSMASH. We examined each connected component within the graph, selecting only those containing regions or MIBiG BGCs identified as trans-AT PKSs for further analysis. The BGCs in the filtered subgraph were then re-analyzed using BiG-SCAPE with the parameters set to –mode glocal –include_singletons –mix –clans-off –cutoffs 0.4. The network was visualized using Cytoscape (v3.10.1) (38) and the results were then manually examined in detail to confirm the presence of a trans-AT PKS producing BGC, based on the domain organization. Subsequently, Clinker (version 0.028) (39) was used to produce comparison plots to manually validate transAT-PKS classification. This step identified similarities between the trans-AT PKS BGCs confirmed experimentally in the MIBiG secondary metabolite database and the BGC regions in the G1034 dataset. In cases where multiple product classes were present in one region,the known-cluster-blast feature in antiSMASH was employed for manual validation to accurately identify the trans-AT PKS BGC. Moreover, we evaluated the BGCs by comparing their domain organizations to that of the reference BGCs, which were similar and supported by experimental evidence from the literature. Finally, based on these comprehensive efforts, we categorized the BGCs into three groups: trans-AT PKS BGCs producing a putative known molecule, unknown trans-AT PKS producing BGCs or BGCs discarded as unverified trans-AT PKSs. Analysis of this section can be found in: Sterndorff, Eva Baggesgaard; Nuhamunada, Matin (2024). Metadata for transAT-PKS analysis. Technical University of Denmark. Online resource. https://doi.org/10.11583/DTU.25663296.