Materials and methods Chemicals All chemicals used in this study were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). The stock solution of MPA was prepared by dissolving 1 mg/mL mycophenolic acid in methanol and stored in the dark at 4 °C. Culture media Six types of culture media were used in this study. Czapek-Dox-Yeast extract medium (CDY) was composed of 20 (g/l): sucrose 30, NaNO3 3, KH2PO4 0.5, KCl 0.5, MgSO4.7H2O 0.5, and 0.5 yeast extract FeSO4.7H2O 0.01 (g/l). Yeast Extract-Sucrose medium (YES) composed of (20 g/l): sucrose 50, yeast extract. Potato-Dextrose medium composed of (g/l): peeled potato slices 200, glucose 20. Yeast Peptone Dextrose (YPDA) was composed of (g/l): 10.0 g yeast extract, 20.0 g peptone, 20.0 g dextrose, and 20.0 g. Malt Extract Sucrose (MES) medium was composed of (g/L): 150.0 sucrose, 20.0 malt extract, 0.5 MgSO4.7H2O. Glucose Peptone medium (LCG) composed of (g/L): 150.0 D-Glucose, 5.0 peptone, 1.0 K2HPO4, 0.5 MgSO4.7H2O, 5.0 NaCl and 1000 mL distilled H2O. Maintenance of MPA producer strain The MPA producer fungal strain was isolated from Mozzarella cheese located in Egyptian markets. The wild type, Penicillium arizonense, and the mutants used in this work were preserved on potato dextrose agar (PDA) slants at 4 °C. The wild type-strain was deposited in the public culture collection, belonging to the WDCM, of Ain Shams University and registered under the number CCASU-2022-F4. Morphological and molecular identification of isolated Fungi The purified isolates were sub-cultured on Potato Dextrose Agar medium (PDA) and allowed to grow at 25 °C for 7 days. Morphological identification was performed according to Raper and Fennell [25] and Pitt and Hocking [26]. The MPA producer strain was identified morphologically according to microscopic characterization as well as molecular analysis. After 7–10 days, some colony properties such as color, texture, and diameter of conidia describing the morphology of Penicillium species, and the degree of sporulation were considered [1]. The characteristics of colonies were recorded and compared with the identification keys [27]. The arrangement of conidia, the intact fruiting body including hyphae, and the phialides were observed after their staining with lactophenol cotton blue (LCB) [28]. Molecular identification of the experimental MPA producer strain was also analyzed, using the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and the benA genes, to confirm the morphological identification according to Visagie et al. [1]. Genomic DNA was extracted from 3-day-old cultures according to the CTAB method [29, 30]. The fungal isolate was identified by ITS rDNA sequencing analysis (18 S, 28 S rRNA, flanking ITS 1, 5.8 S rRNA, and ITS 2) according to White et al. [31]. The molecular identification of the wild-type strain was carried out using the molecular marker β-tubulin (benA) gene, in addition to the ITS gene, according to Visagie et al. [1]. The primers Bt2a and Bt2b were used for the amplification of benA [32]. PCR analysis was carried out according to Sambrook and Russell [33]. The released sequences were deposited in the GenBank database, and Molecular Evolutionary Genetic Analysis (MEGA version 7) software was used for phylogenetic analyses [34]. The closest homologous sequences were selected, and multiple sequence alignments were carried out using the ClustalW program in MEGA7 software. The initial tree(s) for the heuristic search were obtained automatically by applying the Neighbor-Join and the BioNJ algorithms to a matrix of pairwise distances estimated using the Maximum Composite Likelihood (MCL) approach and then selecting the topology with the superior log likelihood value [35]. Evolutionary analyses were conducted in Mega7 software. Estimation of MPA Thin-layer chromatography analysis (TLC) MPA was determined qualitatively using TLC. The methanol extract samples were loaded with the reference standard of MPA on TLC plates using the solvent system toluene: ethyl acetate: formic acid (6:3:1, v:v:v). MPA, with an Rf value of 0.65, showed blue fluorescence spots under long-wavelength ultraviolet light. The spots were visualized by exposing the plates to ammonia vapor before observation under ultraviolet light. The fluorescent spots that appeared identical to the authentic MPA were scraped off and eluted with chloroform. MPA was then quantified by ultraviolet spectroscopic analyses performed with a T80 + UV Flash spectrophotometer PG Instrument LTD, UK spectrophotometer, UK. MPA absorption was measured at 304 nm, and the concentration was obtained after recording the optical density against a standard curve [36]. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis The purified MPA was further analyzed using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using HPLC, EZChrom Elite Client/Server, Agilent, USA [37]. The stock solution of MPA (1 mg mL− 1) was prepared in methanol and stored at 20 °C. The working solution of MPA in the range of 10–100 µg mL− 1 was prepared by serial dilution of the stock solution with methanol. Inducing mutagenesis The irradiation process was carried out by exposing the wild-type P. arizonense strain to different gamma rays at the National Center for Radiation Research and Technology (NCRRT), Nasr City, Cairo, Egypt. The fungal spore suspensions were exposed to various doses of 60Co γ-rays (150, 200, 250, 500, and 750 Gy) emitted by an Indian gamma-ray device through an Indian gamma cell. The irradiated spores were kept in the dark to prevent any photoreaction. The treated and untreated spores were inoculated onto PDA plates by the serial dilution method and incubated at 25 °C for 3 days. Fifty single colonies were selected according to the variation in the color of the metabolite, and the shape and color of the colonies. The selected mutants were preserved in the dark at 4 °C. The mutants were inoculated into MPA production medium and incubated for 10 days at 25 °C. The MPA productivity of the selected mutants was quantitatively estimated, and the highest producer mutants over the wild type were used for stability examination. The stability of each mutant was tested for four generations according to Luthra et al. [38], and the three most stable mutant strains were selected for our study. Optimization of fermentation conditions The fermentation conditions, including culture media, incubation temperature, initial pH values, and fermentation periods, were screened for maximum production of MPA by both the WT strain, P. arizonense HE-MPw1, and the highest producer MT, P. arizonense HE-MPM1. Six types of broth cultures (PD, CDY, YES, LCG150, MES, and YPD) were screened for optimal production of MPA. The incubation time was selected between 10 and 21 days, the tested temperatures were adjusted in the ranges of 20 and 40 °C, and the pH values were adjusted in the ranges of pH 2–8 using citrate phosphate buffer [39]. One milliliter of approximately 107 freshly prepared 5-day-old spore suspensions of the WT and the MT strains was inoculated into 50 mL of sterilized MPA producer medium and incubated under selected conditions according to the experimental design. At the end of the incubation time, the mycelial dry weight, and the amount of MPA were evaluated. Nucleic acid extraction Genomic DNA was extracted using the CTAB method as mentioned above. RNA was extracted by the Triazole reagent protocol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The extraction protocol was modified by some additional steps according to Sah et al. [40]. The RNA pellet was dissolved in 60 µL of autoclaved DEPC-treated water and stored at -20 °C until use. The primers of the predicted genes, orthologous to MPA biosynthesizing MPA, were designed from the orthologous coding sequence of the MPA gene cluster (mpaA, mpaC, mpaF, mpaG and mpaH) of the P. roqueforti, and P. brevicompactum genomes. Bioinformatic analysis of the MPA genes and primers design The MPA gene cluster was identified in the BGC, antiSMASH, and MIBiG databases through the secondary metabolite bioinformatics portal https://mibig.secondarymetabolites.org/. The high conservation between the MPA biosynthesizing genes mpaF, mpaC, and mpaG of P. brevicompactum and their orthologous genes in the P. arizonense genome encouraged us to scan the whole similar putative protein that is responsible for MPA production in the genome of P. arizonense using BlastX, BlastP and BlastN databases. One contig (GenBank accession numbers LXJU01000010.1) containing Open Reading Frames (ORFs) encoding significant similar proteins to mpaA, mpaC, mpaF and mpaH, and another contig (GenBank accession numbers LXJU01000005) encoding significant similar protein to mpaG were identified and downloaded. Blast searches were carried out using the online web link http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. Because these genes play an important role in MPA biosynthesis, we analyzed their expression related to the production of MPA in both wild-type and mutant strains. The primers for the MPA biosynthesizing genes were designed from both P. brevicompactum MIBiG accession BGC0000104 and NCBI GenBank: HQ731031.1 and they were aligned with their homologous sequences of P. arizonense (strain: CBS 141,311). All primers were designed by the Primer 3 plus program http://primer3plus.com/cgi-bin/dev/ primer3plus.cgi and were listed in Table S. 1. The primers were tested for amplification of their corresponding fragments by amplification of conventional PCR analysis. The amplicons were identified using agarose gel electrophoresis. The designed primers were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Detection of MPA genes in the P. arizonense genome using conventional PCR analysis The wild type, P. arizonense-HEwt, and the three MPA producer mutants were inoculated into PD broth and incubated at 25 °C for 5 days under shaking conditions at 150 rpm. MPA was determined as shown previously, and mycelial wet mats were used for DNA extraction. Conventional PCR amplification of the five MPA genes of wild-type and mutant strains, was carried out using the designed oligonucleotide primers shown in Table S. (1). PCR was performed in a final volume of 20 µL at the following reagent concentrations: 4 µL of 5× Phusion HF Green buffer, 0.4 µL of 10 mM dNTPs, 10 pmol of forward and reverse primers (1 µL each), Phusion 0.2 µL of HF DNA polymerase enzyme at 2 U/µL, 2 µL of template DNA (approximately 10 ng), and the total volume of the PCR mixture was adjusted to 20 µL with nuclease-free water. PCR amplification included an initial denaturation step at 98 °C for 30 s, followed by 35 cycles at 98 °C for 10 s, an annealing step for 15 s at 60 °C, an extension step for 20 s at 72 °C, and a final extension for 5 min at 72 °C. The PCR products were analyzed by 1% agarose gel electrophoresis in 1× TEA buffer at room temperature. For gel analysis, 5 µL of the PCR products were loaded in each gel slot. A 100 bp DNA Ladder (Qiagen) was used to determine DNA fragment size. The gel was photographed by a gel documentation system. Gene expression, sequencing, and phylogenetic analysis Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis was used to estimate the gene expression of the predicted MPA genes in P. arizonense. The wild-type and producer mutant strains were inoculated in PD broth and incubated for 5 and 10 days under favorable conditions for MPA production. After the incubation time, mRNA was extracted from the fungal mats, and the cDNA of the five genes was transcribed using reverse transcriptase enzyme using the same primers mentioned previously. The primers were designed for gene coding sequences for partial amplification of cDNA. Primers were utilized in a 25-µL reaction containing 0.25 µL Verso Enzyme Mix (including RNase inhibitor), 12.5 µL 2× Quanti Tect SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Qiagen), 1.25 µL RT enhancer (Thermo Scientific), 0.5 µL of each primer (10 pmol µL− 1), 2.5 µL cDNA template and 6.5 µL water. The reaction was performed in a Strata-gene MX3005P real-time PCR machine. PCR conditions were as follows: reverse transcription at 50 °C for 30 min, initial denaturation for 5 min at 94 °C, followed by 40 cycles of secondary denaturation at 94 °C for 15 s, annealing at 54 °C for 1 s, and extension at 72 °C for 45 s, followed by 1 cycle for dissociation curve analysis of denaturation at 94 °C for 1 min, annealing at 54 °C for 1 min, and final denaturation at 94 °C for 1 min. Amplicons size for each primer pair was verified by gel electrophoresis. The β-actin gene was used as a housekeeping gene through two primers: ACT 512 and ACT 783 [41]. The qRT-PCR data were analyzed by IQ5 optical system software (BioRad, Hercules, CA). The threshold cycles were calculated using the PCR baseline subtracted mode, and the amplification efficiency for each gene amplified from wild-type and mutant strains of P. arizonense was estimated. CT values and amplification curves were calculated using Stratagene MX3005P software (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). The CT value of the β-actin gene, derived from the amplicons, was used as a reference for normalization. To determine the variation in the expression of the MPA genes from the mutant strains, the CT value of each sample was compared with that of the positive control (wild-type strain) according to the BΔΔCt^ method reported by Yuan et al. [42]. The purified PCR products of the MPA genes, amplified from the wild-type strain of P. arizonense, were sequenced in the forward and reverse directions on an Applied Biosystems 3130 Automated DNA Sequencer (ABI, 3130, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) using a ready reaction Bigdye Terminator V3.1 cycle sequencing kit (Perkinelmer/Applied Biosystems; Cat. No. 4,336,817). A BLAST® analysis, Basic Local Alignment Search Tool [43], was initially performed to establish sequence identity to GenBank accessions. The retrieved sequences of all genes were annotated and aligned through the NCBI database using the online website link http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. The completely annotated sequences were registered in the GenBank database under the accession numbers listed in Table S. (2). Multiple sequence alignments of the deduced DNA and proteins were analyzed using the ClustalW program in MEGA7 software, and phylogenetic analysis of both protein and DNA sequences was carried out. The evolutionary history was inferred using the neighbor-joining method [44]. The evolutionary distances were computed using the p-distance method and are in units of the number of amino acid differences per site. Evolutionary analyses were conducted in MEGA7 [35]. The conserved regions of the identified MPA genes were analyzed for their related protein families in the conserved domain database https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/cdd/. Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 25 (IBM Corp., Armonk., NY). Data were presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). For all experiments, a minimum of 3 biological replicates were used. The paired samples t-test was used for the comparison of the mutants (after 5 days and 10 days of incubation), while one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with post hoc pairwise comparisons adjusted by Tukey’s post-test was performed for the evaluation of the difference between mutants in each gene. P values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.