MATERIALS AND METHODS MD simulations The initial geometries of the Top1-DNA-drug ternary complexes were modeled from the crystallographic structures of ternary complexes (PDB 1K4T, 1SC7) (16,17). The CPT-bound and LMP-776-bound ternary complexes were modeled using atomic positions from the 1K4T and 1SC7 structures, respectively (18–22). The topotecan and MJ-III-65 were changed to CPT and LMP-776, respectively; the 5′-sulfhydryl group was replaced by a 5′-hydroxyl group at the cleavage site in the ternary complexes using the Accelrys DS Visualizer. The lactone form of CPT was assumed (23–25). All MD simulations were carried out with the Particle Mesh Ewald molecular dynamics (PMEMD) module in AMBER12 using the ff10 variant and general AMBER force field (GAFF) force fields (26,27). Although MD simulations are known to be limited by force field approximations, AMBER-based force fields have been successfully used to reflect key features of the structural dynamics of DNA and protein molecules (28–30). Counter ions (20 Na+) were added to keep the whole simulated system neutral. The whole system was immersed in the rectangular box of TIP3P water molecules. The water box extended 8 Å away from any solute atom. This resulted in ∼28 270 water molecules used for solvation. Electrostatic interactions were taken into account using the Particle Mesh Ewald method with a cutoff distance of 10 Å (31). We used SHAKE to constrain all bonds involving hydrogen atoms (32). Energy-minimization was executed by the steepest descent method for the first 1000 steps and by the conjugated gradient method for the subsequent 2500 steps. Relaxation of solvent molecules and Na+ ions was initially performed keeping solute atoms restrained to their initial positions for 200ps. The temperature was controlled by Langevin dynamics and was kept constant at 300 K. Each model was simulated for 100 ns. Over 100 000 frames were uniformly extracted over the 100 ns of simulations (33), unless otherwise specified. Analysis of trajectories The trajectories were analyzed using the AMBER12 packages (26), the VMD program (34) and the GROMACS MD package v4.5.5 (35). Root-mean-square deviations The cpptraj module in AMBER12 (26) was used to calculate the root-mean-square deviations (RMSD). RMSD is defined as the root-mean-square-average distance between protein Cα atoms of two optimally superimposed macromolecules, i.e. superimposed macromolecules at each frame (Si) and the starting geometry (S0). After a mass-weighted least square fitting to the starting geometry, the RMSD were calculated using Equation (1):
(1)
where N is the number of equivalent protein Cα atoms in each macromolecules, δ is the distance between N pairs of equivalent atoms (i.e. protein Cα atoms). The RMSD values reach an average value of ∼3 Å (Supplementary Figure S1A). Excluding the linker domain from the analysis, the RMSD values reduce to ∼2 Å (Supplementary Figure S1B). Stable plateaus were reached in all the systems well before 30 ns of the simulation time. Cosine content (ci) Based on the production MD trajectories (the last 70 ns), non-weighted covariance matrix of Cα atoms of the models were calculated to obtain cosine content (ci) using the GROMACS MD package v4.5.5 (35). The cosine content (ci) of a principal component is used as an negative indicator for bad sampling (36). It ranges between 0 (no cosine) and 1 (perfect cosine), when the first of three principal components is similar to a cosine with half a period; the sampling is far from converged. The cosine contents of the first three principal components are far from a perfect cosine (ci < 0.1), indicating that our systems are not bad sampling. Thus, all the analyses listed later in the text were calculated over the production MD trajectories (i.e. the last 70 ns). Dynamic cross-correlation coefficients (Ci,j) The dynamic cross-correlation coefficients were done with cpptraj module in the AMBER package (26), taking into account only the coordinates of the protein Cα, nucleotide N1, N1@CPT,
N1@LMP-776 atom (Supplementary Chart S1), as they contain enough information to describe the largest system motions (37). The dynamic cross-correlation coefficients were computed based on Equation (2):
(2)
where Δri is the displacement from the mean position of the ith atom and <>represents the time average over the whole trajectory. Positive Ci,j values represent a correlated motion between residues i and j (i.e. the residues move in the same direction). Negative values of Ci,j represent an anti-correlated motion between residues i and j (i.e. they move in opposite directions). Root-mean-square fluctuations The per-residue root-mean-square fluctuations (RMSF) is defined as a root-mean-square-average distance between a protein Cα atom (xi) and its time-averaged position of the equivalent atom () in a set of S structures that were extracted from the frames of the production MD trajectories. RMSF were computed using Equation (3):
(3) Clustering The clustering was calculated using the cpptraj module in AMBER12 (26). Structures from the frames of the production trajectories were used to perform average-linkage hierarchical clustering, based on their mass-weighted RMSD distance matrix. DNA-linker angle The DNA-linker angle is defined as the angle between N1@A+12−N1@X+1−Cα@ASP677 (Supplementary Scheme S2). X+1 and A+12 are the nucleotides at the +1 and +12 positions of the intact DNA strand. Hydrogen bond Hydrogen bonds were defined as the default setting at the cpptraj program. Hydrogen bonds are determined via the distance between the heavy atoms using a cutoff of 3.5 Å and the angle between the acceptor, hydrogen, and donor atoms using a cutoff of 135 degrees, unless otherwise specified. Molecular mechanics-generalized born surface area The drug binding energies were calculated using the mmGBSA.py module (igb=2) in AMBER12 (26). The per-residue decomposition energies reflect the relative strength of each specific residue, i.e. its importance to the binding. The post-processing molecular mechanics-generalized born surface area (MM-GBSA) method, using the modified generalized Born model (38), is known to be good at qualitative accuracy (39–43). We herein focused our discussions on qualitative comparison. The total binding energy (ΔGtot) was decomposed into contributions from electrostatic energies (ΔEelec), van der Waals interaction energies (ΔEvdw), electrostatic solvation (ΔGGB) and non-polar solvation (ΔGnon-polar) free energies as shown in Equation (4):
(4) The entropy was not considered because of its high computational demand and relatively low accuracy of prediction (44). The per-residue decomposition with 1–4 VDW and 1–4 EEL terms were added to internal potential terms. PMF PMF was calculated to study the free-energy profiles for drug dissociation. The PMF is a function of the distance between the CPT and the ternary complex (χ), which can be used to monitor the drug dissociation process (Supplementary Scheme S3). The distance (χ) is defined as the distance between P@A−1 and N1@CPT (Supplementary Chart S1). Umbrella sampling was performed by calculating a series of dynamic simulations with biased potential in a format of K(χ − χi)2, where K = 5 or 10 or 20 kcal mol−1 and χi ranged from 0 to 50 Å. Umbrella sampling windows were separated by 1 Å. Simulations with K = 5 were carried out for at least 0.2 ns; the rest of the simulations were carried out with K = 10 and 20 for at least 0.4 ns each, until convergence is reached. All the simulations were combined to construct the final PMF. Multiple starting structures were extracted from the all-atom simulations. Each simulation was started from the end point of the previous one. Adjacent histograms were found to show significant overlaps, indicating that all values of a distance within the desired range had been appropriately sampled. The unbiased free energy was obtained using the weight histogram analysis method (http://membrane.urmc.rochester.edu/content/wham) with convergence criterion of 10−4 and a bin width of 0.2 Å (45). The convergence of final PMF was tested by comparing the free energy change calculated using the full sampling to that calculated using shorter sampling time. For each PMF models, at least 50 ns of simulations were carried out until the PMF profile converged.