Experimental procedures Fungal and bacterial strains, media and growth conditions Aspergillus fumigatus strains used in this study are listed in Table 2. Strains were grown in Aspergillus minimal medium (AMM) as described previously (Weidner et al., 1998). AMM agar was prepared by addition of 1.6% (w/v) Select Agar (Invitrogen, Germany). If required, pyrithiamine (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) or hygromycin (Roche Applied Science, Germany) in a final concentration of 0.1 µg ml−1 and 200 µg ml−1, respectively, were added. For studies on iron regulation, fungal strains were grown at 37°C in AMM, containing 1% (w/v) glucose as carbon source, 20 mM glutamine as nitrogen source, trace elements according to Cove including 30 µM FeSO4 as iron source (+Fe conditions). Trace elements without iron were used for −Fe conditions. For transformation of Escherichia coli, TOP10F′ cells (Invitrogen, Germany) were used. E. coli cells were grown at 37°C in LB medium supplemented with 100 µg ml−1 ampicillin or 50 µg ml−1 kanamycin when required. Fungal strains used in this study Strain Description Reference. CEA17ΔakuBKU80 akuBKU80::pyrG; PyrG+ da Silva Ferreira et al. (2006). ΔmpkA mpkA::ptrA; ΔmpkA, ΔakuB, PTR Valiante et al. (2009). ΔhapX hapX::hph; ΔhapX, HygR Schrettl et al. (2010a,b);. ΔsreA sreA::hph; ΔsreA, HygR Schrettl et al. (2008). ΔhapX/ΔmpkA hapX::hph, mpkA::ptrA; ΔhapX,ΔmpkA, PTR, HygR This study. ΔsreA/ΔmpkA sreA::hph, mpkA::ptrA; ΔsreA,ΔmpkA, PTR, HygR This study. otefp–mpkA–egfp ATCC46645 derivative; otefp–mpkA–egfp; HygR This study. otefp–mpkA–egfp (comp) ΔmpkA derivative; otefp–mpkA–egfp; HygR, MpkA+ This study. Generation of recombinant A. fumigatus strains Primers used in this study are listed in Table S1. For the generation of plasmid otefp–mpkA–egfp, the mpkA gene was amplified by PCR from plasmid pCR2.1mpkA (Valiante et al., 2008) using the oligonucleotides MpkA_for_1 and MpkA_SmaI_rev. The resulting DNA fragment was cut with SmaI and BamHI, then inserted into the BamHI and SmaI site of plasmid p123otef-hph. In addition to the otef promoter, this vector included the egfp gene and the hygromycin resistance cassette. The resulting plasmid p123otefp–mpkA–eGFP carrying the mpkA gene under the control of the otef promoter was used to transform A. fumigatus wild-type strain ATCC 46645. Several hygromycin-resistant transformants were obtained and analysed by fluorescence microscopy and Southern blot (data not shown). One of them, producing the MpkA–EGFP fusion protein, was designated as ATCC46645otefp–mpkA–eGFP and used for further studies. For deletion of hapX the ‘three fragment fusion PCR technique’ was employed. Primer pairs HapX_for_1, HapX_rev(hph) and HapX_for(hph), HapX_rev_1 were used to amplify the 5′ and 3′ flanking regions of the hapX gene respectively. Oligonucleotides Hph_For and Hph_Rev were used to amplify the hygromycin resistance cassette from plasmid pUChph. The HapX_rev(hph) and HapX_for(hph) primers also contained sequences complementary to the sequence of Hph_for and Hph_rev primers. In the first round of PCR, the 5′ and 3′ flanking region of the hapX gene and hygromycin gene were amplified separately. To fuse these three PCR products, they were purified and a fusion PCR was performed using HapX_for_1 and Hapx_rev_1 primers. Phusion high-fidelity DNA polymerase (Finnzymes, Finland) was used for all PCRs. The A. fumigatusΔmpkA strain was transformed with the hapX deletion plasmid (Valiante et al., 2009). For obtaining the sreA disruption construct, primer pairs SreA_for_2 and SreA_rev_2 were used to amplify the sreA disruption cassette from strain ΔsreA (Schrettl et al., 2008). A. fumigatusΔmpkA strain was also transformed with this disruption construct. Transcriptome analysis Full genome transcriptomic analyses were performed at Febit (Germany) (http://www.febit.de). Each array on the biochip comprises 15 000 probes. These probes are 30-mers covering all postulated gene transcripts that were designed based on the available genome sequence. Probes were selected according to a preliminary experiment that determined probes with highest specificity. The best probe was calculated for each gene fragment of interest. The second-best probes were chosen for gene fragments longer than 1200 bp. The intensities of blank probes which only consist of one single T nucleotide are used for background corrections. Blank, labelling control and hybridization control probes are not included in the data analysis. To assess the reproducibility of the biological replicates, scatter plots were made and the Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated. For comparing two sample types, the data set of both samples was normalized using the ‘Quantile/Quantile’ method. The results of the microarray analyses were deposited in the OmniFung Data Warehouse (http://www.omnifung.hki-jena.de; see A. fumigatus collection ‘Glucanex stress’). For microarray analyses, the ΔmpkA mutant was inoculated in a four times higher amount than the wild type to achieve equal glucose consumption for both strains (Valiante et al., 2009). Whole RNA was isolated from wild-type and ΔmpkA cultures grown for 14 h in AMM at 37°C. For the analysis of cell wall stress, RNA was isolated 20 min after addition of glucanex [0.4% (w/v), Novozyme, Denmark]. Two biological replicates for each strain under inducing and non-inducing conditions were analysed. RNA was isolated by Qiagen RNeasy Plant Mini kit (Qiagen, Germany). Additionally, the samples were treated with DNase (TurboDNA-free kit, Ambion, Germany). Raw data were analysed according to Febit's protocol. Fluorescence analysis For fluorescence microscopy of mycelia, the strains were grown in 3 ml of AMM supplemented with appropriate supplements at 37°C. For all microscopic studies, a Leica DM4500 B digital fluorescence microscope (Leica Microsystems, Germany) was used. Nuclei were stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for 1 min. For documentation, a Leica DFC480 digital camera was used. Western blot analysis Conidia from A. fumigatus were incubated in AMM for 14 h in iron-depleted medium. FeSO4 (10 µM) was added. Mycelia were harvested at different time points (15, 30 and 60 min after addition of 10 µM FeSO4) and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. For reverse experiment, conidia were incubated in AMM for 14 h and then 1 mM desferrioxamin (DFO) (Sigma, Germany) was added as iron chelator. Mycelia were harvested as well at different time points (15, 30 and 60 min after addition of 1 mM DFO) and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. One hundred milligrams mycelium was ground under liquid nitrogen to a fine powder using mortar and pestle. Protein extraction and Western blot analysis was carried out as described before (Valiante et al., 2009). Northern blot analysis For analysis of transcript levels of different genes during cell wall stress condition, 0.4% (w/v) glucanex was added to A. fumigatus wild type and ΔmpkA pre-cultivated for 14 h in AMM. Samples were collected at 0 min and 20 min after addition of glucanex and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Iron-regulated gene expression was evaluated by isolation of RNA from cultures grown for 14 h under +Fe and −Fe conditions. Total RNA (10 µg) was separated on a denaturing agarose gel and blotted onto Hybond N+ nylon membranes. Probe labelling, hybridization and detection were performed using the DIG Labelling Mix, DIG Easy Hyb and the CDP-Star ready-to-use kit according to the instructions of the manufacturer (Roche Applied Science, Germany). CAS assay The CAS assay was used to measure the total extracellular siderophore activity of the different strains (Schwyn and Neilands, 1987). The assay is based on the competitive exchange of iron(III) from an indicator dye, chrome azurol S (CAS). The affinity of CAS for iron(III) is slightly lower than that of most siderophores, and hence the metal ion is quantitatively released to a competing ligand. The colour of the dye changes from blue to orange which is measured by absorbance at 630 nm. The strains were grown for 14 h in +Fe and −Fe media at 37°C and the supernatants were collected by filtration while the mycelium was dried and weighed for biomass measurement. An aliquot of the supernatant was used for the CAS assay. A standard curve based on different dilutions of ferrichrome was calculated. For deducing the percentage of siderophores secreted, the CAS assay reading of each strain was divided by its dry weight (g) respectively. Gliotoxin measurement by HPLC The A. fumigatus wild-type and ΔmpkA strains were cultivated in 250 ml of Czapek-Dox medium at 28°C for 7 days. For gliotoxin extraction, mycelium was separated from the culture supernatant by Miracloth. To the culture supernatant, 2.8 mg of 4-nitrocatechol was added as internal standard before extraction. Extraction was done twice with 100 ml of ethyl acetate. The combined organic phases were dried with Na2SO4, and the solvent was removed under reduced pressure. The samples were re-dissolved in 8 ml of methanol and measured on a JASCO HPLC with DAD monitoring. For HPLC measurements, 20 µl of the concentrated sample were injected. A Nucleosil 100 (250 × 4.6 mm, 5 µm) column was used at a flow rate of 1 ml min−1 with the following gradient: A, H2O, 0.1% (v/v) TFA; B, acetonitrile; start 20% B, in 20 min 65% B, after 28 min 100% B for 10 min. Gliotoxin standard elutes after 12 min and the internal standard 4-nitrocatechol elutes after 8.6 min. For quantification of gliotoxin, a calibration curve was calculated from 16 µg to 1 mg. For quantification of the internal standard, a calibration curve was calculated from 63 µg to 1 mg. Analysis of amino acids and polyamines The analysis of amino acids was performed according to the procedure reported by de Kraker et al. (2007) with slight modifications. Briefly, samples were extracted with 0.1 N HCl, adjusted to pH 10 with 0.5 M potassium borate buffer and pre-column derivatized with o-phathaldehyde (OPA)/mercaptoethanol. The derivatized samples were analysed on a Hewlett Packard HP 1100 Series HPLC system with autosampler and fluorescence detector (FLD) (Ex 340 nm, Em 445 nm). The gradient was optimized to detect ornithine. A Chromolith Performance RP-18e column (4.6 mm i.d., Merck, Germany) was used at a flow rate of 1.5 ml min−1 at 28°C with the following gradient of 0.02 M citrate buffer of pH 5.5 (solvent A) and methanol:acetonitrile (65:35, v : v; solvent B): 15–36% B (21 min), 36–78% (14 min) followed by a cleaning cycle (78–100% B for 0.10 min, 2.5 min hold, 100–15% B for 0.1 min, 15% B for 1.5 min). The amino acids were quantified by using a calibration curve of the commercially available mix of standard amino acids (Fluka, Germany). For the polyamine analysis, samples were extracted as previously reported and analysed by HPLC-FLD as o-phathaldehyde (OPA)-ethanethiol (ET)-fluotenylmethyl chloroformate (FMOC) derivatives, according to Hanczko et al. (2005). A Chromolith Performance RP-18e column (4.6 mm i.d., Merck, Germany) was used at a flow rate of 1.5 ml min−1 at 28°C with the following gradient of 0.02 M citrate buffer of pH 5.5 (solvent A) and methanol : acetonitrile (65:35, v : v; solvent B): 0–100% B (10 min), 100% B (13 min), 50% B for 0.10 min, 50% for 1.5 min. The polyamines were quantified by using a calibration curve of spermine, spermidine and putrescine (Sigma Aldrich, Germany).