Methods PKS genes and genome databases PKS genes and genome databases We collected the amino acid sequences in the GenBank Database for eight Aspergillus species (A. clavatus NRRL1, -flavus NRRL3357, -fumigatus A1163/Af293, -nidulans FGSCA4, -niger CBS513.88, -oryzae RIB40, -terreus NIH2624, and Neosartorya fischeri NRRL181 also known as A. fischerianus). To obtain PKS genes in these species, we first availed ourselves of the CADRE database of University Hospital in Manchester, UK (release 3).12 For verification we referenced the AspGD database of the Broad Institute and Stanford University.13 We first collected all PKS sequences of more than 800 amino acid residues that feature KS and AT domains alignable to their consensus sequences. Then we collected candidate sequences of iPKS from over 100 species based on a BLAST search and literature sources (see http://metabolomics.jp/wiki/Category:PK/References).8,14 We also included bacterial iPKS sequences used in recent phylogenetic studies and added 10 FAS genes from higher and lower eukaryotes as an outgroup.4,10,15–21 We collected the amino acid sequences in the GenBank Database for eight Aspergillus species (A. clavatus NRRL1, -flavus NRRL3357, -fumigatus A1163/Af293, -nidulans FGSCA4, -niger CBS513.88, -oryzae RIB40, -terreus NIH2624, and Neosartorya fischeri NRRL181 also known as A. fischerianus). To obtain PKS genes in these species, we first availed ourselves of the CADRE database of University Hospital in Manchester, UK (release 3).12 For verification we referenced the AspGD database of the Broad Institute and Stanford University.13 We first collected all PKS sequences of more than 800 amino acid residues that feature KS and AT domains alignable to their consensus sequences. Then we collected candidate sequences of iPKS from over 100 species based on a BLAST search and literature sources (see http://metabolomics.jp/wiki/Category:PK/References).8,14 We also included bacterial iPKS sequences used in recent phylogenetic studies and added 10 FAS genes from higher and lower eukaryotes as an outgroup.4,10,15–21 Throughout our study we referenced several PKS-specific databases for domain information. For functionally identified PKS genes we used PKSDB and ITERDB (National Institute of Immunology, India), which contain information and references on 20 modularly- and 13 iteratively synthesized polyketides, respectively.22,23 The other information source was MapsiDB developed in Korea by SmallSoft Co., Ltd.24 This database provides genomic information on 45 modularly and 21 iteratively synthesized polyketides and is part of the MAPSI (Management and Analysis for Polyketide Synthase Type I) prediction system that is based on the hidden Markov model. We used this tool extensively in our domain predictions. Throughout our study we referenced several PKS-specific databases for domain information. For functionally identified PKS genes we used PKSDB and ITERDB (National Institute of Immunology, India), which contain information and references on 20 modularly- and 13 iteratively synthesized polyketides, respectively.22,23 The other information source was MapsiDB developed in Korea by SmallSoft Co., Ltd.24 This database provides genomic information on 45 modularly and 21 iteratively synthesized polyketides and is part of the MAPSI (Management and Analysis for Polyketide Synthase Type I) prediction system that is based on the hidden Markov model. We used this tool extensively in our domain predictions. Assignment of catalytic domains and PKS types Amino acid sequences were analyzed with MAPSI and the Conserved Domain Database (CDD) from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).25 The use of multiple prediction tools is important because MAPSI recognizes neither the ME domain nor domains in NRPS genes. CDD, a general-purpose system not optimized for PKS, is based on a position-specific scoring matrix and yields many false positives. We manually removed unreasonable predictions such as domains unrelated to PKS. After determining the domain composition we assigned each gene to one of 7 PKS types (Table 1). Labels for NRPS-PKS and bacterial iPKS (bMSAS or bPR-PKS) were assigned only when such assignment was supported by the NCBI web resource (especially GenBank) or other literature sources. The remaining 4 types (6-MSAS, NR-PKS, PR-PKS, or R-PKS) were assigned based on literature information or the domain composition predicted by computational tools. Thus, we first assigned the 6-MSAS label to small genes with KS-AT-DH-KR-ACP domains in this order.15,16 Next, the NR-PKS label was assigned to genes without any DH, KR, and ER domains. We assigned the PR-PKS label to genes without the ER domain and the R-PKS label to the remaining genes. Whenever gene functions were experimentally identified we assigned labels according to the biosynthetic role of the genes. Fewer than 20% of all PKS genes, however, have been functionally identified by detailed experiments. Domain genealogy construction According to our data curation policy, all genes must contain both KS and AT domains. Multiple alignments of amino acid sequences were performed by CLUSTALW and MUSCLE software embedded in the MEGA program package (Version 5.0) with manual corrections.26 We did not use sequences with incomplete domains. Phylogenetic inference was obtained with neighbor-joining (NJ)- and maximum- parsimony (MP) algorithms with a bootstrap test (1000 pseudo-replicates) in the MEGA package. Visualization was with the TreeDyn software package.27 The concise KS tree was created for a reduced set of domain sequences. After generating the complete tree with all KS domains we one-by-one chose reliable clades with a bootstrap value greater than 75 and fed them into the CD-HIT program to obtain representative sequences for each clade.28 Lastly, the chosen sequences were subjected to the phylogenetic algorithms to form a reduced tree. Database construction Database construction PKS genes from Aspergilli and related iPKS genes from other fungi and bacteria are registered in our wiki-based database. Each entry contains information on the (1) species, (2) gene product (if identified), (3) GenBank and UniProt identifiers, (4) domains predicted by computational tools, (5) domains based on literature and databases, (6) PKS type; additional information, if any, is also included. The website also provides a summary view that lists genes for each biological species, ie, UniRef grouping,29 PKS type, and domain patterns. The web interface was originally developed for different types of molecular biology data by one of the authors (M.A.). PKS genes from Aspergilli and related iPKS genes from other fungi and bacteria are registered in our wiki-based database. Each entry contains information on the (1) species, (2) gene product (if identified), (3) GenBank and UniProt identifiers, (4) domains predicted by computational tools, (5) domains based on literature and databases, (6) PKS type; additional information, if any, is also included. The website also provides a summary view that lists genes for each biological species, ie, UniRef grouping,29 PKS type, and domain patterns. The web interface was originally developed for different types of molecular biology data by one of the authors (M.A.). Phylogenomic analysis of KS domains The KS region is the best conserved domain. Phylogenetic estimates on KS only coincide with results that are based on combined KS and AT domains. The only exceptions are PKS genes from the protozoa Cryptosporidium parvum; they manifest a non-standard evolutionary trace for the AT domain.18
Figs. 1 and 2 provide a concise view of our phylogenetic analysis on KS domains; Supplementary Fig. S1 shows details. Phylogenetically, NR-PKS, (P)R-PKS, and 6-MSAS types clustered well.38 The NR-PKS type is adjacent to bacterial PKS genes, many of which are involved in phenolpthiocerol synthesis. There are two fungal clades deep inside bacterial PKS (called the nested fungal clade or NFC); one is for NRPS-PKS and the other, larger one, for 6-MSAS. The two NFCs were statistically supported to have originated in actinobacteria and to have been horizontally transferred later into ascomycete fungi.16,38,41 The NR-PKS type is separated into three classes (I–III in Fig. 1). The NR-PKS I type contains genes for aflatoxins, melanins, pigments, and naphthopyrones. NR-PKS III type contains one gene for citrinin (pksCT in Monascus purpureus), but the function of most other genes remains unknown. NR-PKS II type is a small class of genes of unknown function. The higher relationship among NR-PKS, R-PKS, 6-MSAS, and bacterial PKS types was different from that reported in earlier studies,17,38 as was the topological position of FAS (Figs. 1 and 2). The higher part was susceptible to the number of genes and also the clustering method. In our analysis, the NJ method tended to place the outgroup FAS between R-PKS and NR-PKS, whereas the MP method did not. The relationship within each gene-type was much better conserved in all phylogenomic studies.17–19,38,41 In contrast to the well-clustered NR-PKS genes, R-PKS and 6-MSAS types were separated into many small groups. The R-PKS type contains the genes for fumonisin, lovastatin, and t-toxin but few genes have been experimentally verified. A recent excellent work identified a number of new products for NR-PKS genes in nidulans;10 such identification would be more difficult for reducing PKS genes. An interesting finding was polyphyly of the NRPS-PKS type; this is in contrast with observations derived from much wider studies focusing on NRPS.41,42 In our study, the KS sequences for NRPS-PKS co-occurred with those for 6-MSAS type in clades for equisetin, pseurotin A, and cyclopiazonic acid.43 While this observation may be attributable to incomplete experimental evidence or to incomplete resolution of the KS phylogeny, it points to an evolutionary and mechanistic relationship of the hybrid genes with the 6-MSAS type. This also justifies our curation process in which we did not annotate hybrid PKS only from sequence similarity. Among such hybrid genes, NRPS7/PKS24 in Cochliobolus heterostrophus (AAR90278) drew significant attention as the model HGT target.41,44 This hybrid gene is similar to a putative PR-PKS gene in Chaetomium globosum (XP_001224327) and a NRPS-PKS gene in niger (AM270324). All three sequences are grouped inside the NFC. Lawrence et al44 reconfirmed the simultaneous transfer of the NRPS and PKS domains for the smaller NFC in the early evolutionary phase of Pezizomycotina (euascomycota), ie, after divergence of the saccharomyces group. The other, larger NFC is expected to be equally ancient; it includes pksPN (AAP33839) for ochratoxin A (OTA) biosynthesis in Penicillium nordicum and a putative aflatoxin gene pksL2 (AAC23536) in parasiticus. The involvement of pksL2 in aflatoxin biosynthesis is esoteric because all aflatoxin-related genes belong to the NR-PKS group. Additional evidence is required to detect its true function. On the other hand, investigations into pksPN are a worthwhile challenge. The OTA-PKS of P. nordicum is most similar to the 6-MSAS type and requires an NRPS to catalyze the ligation of phenylalanine. However, a different biosynthetic pathway may exist in ochratoxigenic Aspergillus species.45 Our phylogenetic analysis based on the KS domain indicates such an alternative: the OTA-PKS of A. ochraceus is similar to R-PKS, not 6-MSAS. Earlier studies of ochraceus also support such alternative routes using different domains.46,47 The simultaneous transfer of NRPS and PKS, and the subsequent neofunctionalization as OTA synthase is an intriguing hypothesis that we intend to test in the future. As more sequences are obtained, similar analyses can be performed for equisetin-, pseurotin A-, and cyclopiazonic acid-related genes in Aspergilli to clarify the origin of NRPS-PKS hybrids in relation to 6-MSAS types. Web-based database system When sequences of more than 400 genes are involved, it is difficult to obtain detailed information for each sequence from published research only. Most genomic information is available on the Internet, eg, from NCBI and EBI repositories. Thus, a web-based database is the best interface to fully utilize the results of phylogenomic analyses. We created a website for PKS information in Aspergilli; users have full access to sequence data and experimental, referenced annotations and classifications. For the best results, the website is maintained by a wiki-based system and each entry can be asynchronously updated through a web browser by registered users. As more systematic studies on iPKS genes are presented,10,35 we expect to elaborate our analysis through such rapidly accumulating information. To maintain the quality of academic information we do not allow publicly free edits. Collaborating users are requested to contact the author (M.A.) to obtain a login ID.