Materials and Methods Fungal strains and general molecular techniques The wild-type strain of P. roqueforti CECT 2905 (ATCC 10110), originally isolated from a blue cheese sample, was used in this work. Penicillium roqueforti transformants were obtained by protoplast transformation of strain CECT 2905, as described below. Potato dextrose agar (PDA; Merck, Germany) was used for the routine growth of all the strains. The protocol described by Gil-Duran et al. [16] was used for DNA isolation. For total RNA purification, the strains were grown on YES agar (Bacto Yeast Extract (Difco, USA) 20 g/l, sucrose (Merck, Germany, biochemical grade) 150 g/l and Bacto Agar (Difco, USA) 20 g/l) for 7 days at 28°C. Total RNA was isolated exactly as described previously [16]. RT-PCR experiments were performed as described by Ravanal et al. [17]. RACE-PCR experiments were performed with the FirstChoice RLM-RACE Kit (Invitrogen, USA) according to the manufacturer`s protocol. Bioinformatic identification and characterization of the mpa cluster of P. roqueforti The highly conserved MpaF protein, encoded by the mpaF gene from P. brevicompactum, was used to scan the whole draft genome of P. roqueforti [18] by tBlastN. Two contigs (GenBank accessions CBMR010000200 and CBMR010000309) containing ORFs encoding proteins with significant similarity to MpaF were identified and downloaded. The vicinities of each of these ORFs were then manually analyzed by BlastX, BlastP and BlastN. All Blast searches were performed using the online web interface at http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. Multiple alignments of deduced proteins were performed using Clustal Omega at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalo/. Construction of plasmids to silence the seven genes of the MPA gene cluster RNA-mediated gene silencing technology has been successfully used to silence genes in P. roqueforti [16, 19]. Here we used the same experimental approach. Plasmid pJL43-RNAi [20] was used to generate seven constructs (S1 Fig) as follows: pJL43-RNAi was digested with NcoI. In parallel, a small fragment of each gene from the mpa cluster was amplified with suitable primers and was also digested with NcoI. Finally, each digested fragment was ligated into pJL43-RNAi, thus giving rise to the plasmids pJL-RNAi-mpaA, pJL-RNAi-mpaB, pJL-RNAi-mpaC, pJL-RNAi-mpaDE, pJL-RNAi-mpaF, pJL-RNAi-mpaG and pJL-RNAi-mpaH, which were used to transform P. roqueforti (see below). These plasmids contain the respective DNA fragment flanked by two promoters in opposite directions (S1 Fig), which generate double-stranded RNA molecules (dsRNAs). These dsRNAs activate the fungal RNA-silencing machinery, resulting in the degradation of target mRNAs [20]. S1 Table shows the primer sequences and the size of the fragment ligated in each construct. Transformation of P. roqueforti P. roqueforti transformants were obtained by introducing the genetic constructs described above into strain CECT 2905 by protoplast transformation. Protoplast obtainment, transformation, selection of transformants on Czapek-sorbitol medium containing phleomycin, and obtainment of homokaryotic strains were carried out exactly as described before [16]. Quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis The silencing level of each gene in the transformants was analyzed by qRT-PCR as described previously [16]. Total RNA was quantified in a MultiSkan GO quantification system (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Two μg were used to synthesize cDNA using RevertAid Reverse Transcriptase (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Each qRT-PCR reaction (20 μl) contained 10 μl of KAPA SYBR Fast qRT-PCR Master Mix 2x (Kapa Biosystems, USA), 0.4 μl of each primer (at a concentration of 10 μM each), 0.4 μl de 50x ROX High/Low, 6.8 μl of water and 2 μl of cDNA. qRT-PCR reactions were carried out using the StepOne Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, USA). Amplification conditions were as follows: 20 s at 95°C and 40 cycles of 3 s at 95°C and 30 s at 50°C. Three replicates were performed for each analysis and suitable negative controls were included. Relative gene expression values were determined by the comparative Ct (ΔΔCt) method using β-tubulin gene expression as a normalization control. S2 Table describes the sequence of the primer sets used in qRT-PCR. All exhibited suitable efficiencies as required for the comparative Ct (ΔΔCt) method (S3 Table). Extraction and HPLC analysis of MPA Each fungal strain was grown on YES agar (see the composition above) for 7 days at 28°C. For each strain the mycelium from three Petri dishes was scraped off the agar. After that, the remaining agar was triturated. Both the mycelium and the triturated agar were extracted separately according to the method described by O´Brien et al. [21], with some modifications. Each sample (mycelium or agar) was extracted overnight with 50 ml of an ethyl acetate: dichloromethane: methanol (3:2:1) mixture containing formic acid (1%). The mixtures were then sonicated for 30 minutes, filtered through a 0.45 μm Millex-HV hydrophilic PVDF syringe filter (Merck Millipore), and evaporated to dryness in a rotary evaporator. The extracts were resuspended in 500 μl of methanol (HPLC grade) just before HPLC analysis. HPLC analysis was performed on a Waters 1525 HPLC system (Waters, Ireland) equipped with a Waters 1525 Binary HPLC pump and a Waters 2996 Photodiode Array (PDA) Detector, using the chromatographic method described by Nielsen et al. [22] with some modifications. Briefly, 20 μl of the methanol suspension described before were injected into a 4.6 x 250 mm (5 μm) SunFire C18 column (Waters, Ireland). The column was held at 35°C. A solvent gradient with water and acetonitrile (both acidified with 0.02% trifluoroacetic acid) at a flow rate of 1.2 ml/min was used. The gradient began with 15% acetonitrile and was increased to 68% acetonitrile after 25 minutes. The acetonitrile was then increased to 100% within 2 min. This percentage remained constant for 5 minutes before returning to 15% acetonitrile. MPA was detected by UV absorption at 300 nm and quantified using the pure compound as standard (purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX). MPA showed a retention time of 18.25 min. For each strain used, the quantity of MPA was normalized by the dry weight of the fungal mycelia. For this purpose, and after the extraction with ethyl acetate/dichloromethane/methanol, the mycelia from each sample were dried according to García-Rico et al. [23]. Analysis of the MPA resistance in P. roqueforti strains MPA treatment of the fungi was performed by the spot assay method described by Hansen et al. [24]. Briefly, spores from P. roqueforti strains were harvested, and a suspension of 1x106 spores/ml was obtained. From this initial suspension, 10-fold dilution series were performed on freshly made CYA-plates containing 100 μg MPA/ml (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX). Plates were incubated for 9 days at 28°C.