Methods Aspergillus fumigatusstrain information and growth conditions Conidia were maintained on malt extract agar plates. A. fumigatus wild-type and mutant strains (1 × 106 cfu/ml) were cultured in Sabouraud-Dextrose media at 37°C with shaking at 200 rpm for 21 h in duplicate or triplicate. Gliotoxin (5 μg/ml final) or MeOH (solvent control) was added and the cultures were incubated for a further 3 h. The mycelia were harvested through miracloth, washed with DEPC water and snap frozen in liquid N2. RNA extraction and mRNA isolation RNA was isolated from mycelia, ground to a fine powder in liquid N2, using the RNeasy™ Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA integrity was analysed using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer™ and an Agilent RNA 6000 Nano Kit following the manufacturer’s recommendation. Library preparation and sequencing A library was independently prepared for each biological replicate. Two protocols (TruSeq and Illumina mRNA-seq kit) were used for preparing the Illumina transcriptome libraries. For both protocols, polyadenylated mRNA was purified from total RNA using oligo-dT dynabead selection followed by metal ion hydrolysis fragmentation with an RNA fragmentation solution supplied in kits. First strand synthesis, primed using random oligonucleotides, was followed by second strand synthesis with RNaseH and DNA polI to produce double-stranded cDNA using the Illumina mRNA Seq kit or the TruSeq Illumina kit. Template DNA fragments were end-repaired with T4 and Klenow DNA polymerases and blunt-ended with T4 polynucleotide kinase. A single 3′ adenosine was added to the repaired ends using Klenow exo- and dATP to reduce template concatemerization and adapter dimer formation, and to increase the efficiency of adapter ligation. Adapters (containing primer sites for sequencing, and index sequences when using the TruSeq protocol) were then ligated. Libraries made with the TruSeq protocol were amplified by PCR using KAPA HiFi Polymerase (to enrich for properly ligated template strands, to generate enough DNA, and to add primers for flowcell surface annealing). AMPure SPRI beads were used to purify amplified templates before pooling based on quantification using an Agilent Bioanalyser chip. Pooled TruSeq libraries were then pooled and size selected using the Caliper. After adaptor ligation, individual libraries made with the Illumina mRNA-seq kit were size selected using the CaliperLabChip before PCR amplification followed by AMPure SPRI bead clean up and removal of adaptors with a second Caliper run. KAPA Illumina SYBR Fast qPCR kit was used to quantify the Illumina mRNA-seq libraries before pooling. No qPCR was necessary with the TruSeq libraries and instead a final Agilent Bioanalyser chip analysis was run to confirm the dilution of the final pool. The libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq platform with a read length of 75 bp paired-ended according to manufacturer’s instructions. Data processing The RNA-seq paired-end reads for each biological replicate were aligned independently using Tophat v2.0.4 [23618408] to the A. fumigatus Af293 (CADRE 3a) reference genome sequence with default parameters. The numbers of fragments mapped per replicate is given in Additional file
2: Table S13. Differential gene expression analysis was carried out for each sample independently using Cufflinks (cuffdiff) v2.0.2 [20436464] with default parameters against the gene set in Ensembl Genomes release 14 (CADRE genebuild 3a). The sequencing data has been submitted to the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) under accession ERP001382 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/ERP001382&display=html). Data analysis The differentially regulated genes were analysed using FungiFun
[60] to establish association with any functions or pathways in comparison with the non-differentially regulated genes. Gene enrichment analysis was carried out on the up-regulated and down-regulated genes, respectively, for FunCat
[23] categories and the A. fumigatus annotated KEGG pathways
[24]. A p value cut-off of 0.05 was used. Real time PCR (qRT-PCR) RNA samples were DNase treated using a DNase kit supplied by Sigma-Aldrich. cDNA synthesis was performed using qScript™ cDNASuperMix (Quanta Biosciences) following the kit instructions. Primers used in this study are listed in Additional file
2: Table S14. The constitutively expressed gene, A. fumigatus calmodulin (calm)
[61] was used as a reference gene. qRT-PCR was performed on the LightCycler®2 480 Real-Time PCR System using the LightCycler®1 Sybr Green 1 Master Mix (Roche) as described previously
[62]. qRT-PCR reactions for each gene were analysed in triplicate and were carried out for 40 cycles. Feeding experiments with [13C]-phenylalanine A. fumigatus Af293 was cultured in Czapek-Dox Broth at 37°C with shaking at 200 rpm in duplicate for 24 h before addition of gliotoxin (5 μg/ml final) or methanol (solvent control) and [13C]-phenylalanine (10 μg/ml final) or water (solvent control). Cultures were incubated again at 37°C with shaking at 200 rpm. Culture supernatant was removed after 48 h and again after 72 h. Supernatants were chloroform extracted, dried and resolubilised in methanol prior to LC-MS analysis as described previously
[2]. Whole proteome analysis A. fumigatus ∆gliTATCC26933 was cultured in Sabouraud-Dextrose media for 21 h followed by gliotoxin (5 μg/ml final) or methanol addition for 3 h (n =4 biological replicates for all specimens). Mycelial lysates were prepared in lysis buffer (100 mM Tris–HCl, 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM EDTA, 10% (v/v) Glycerol, 1 mM PMSF, 1 μg/ml pepstatin A, pH 7.5) with grinding, sonication and clarified using centrifugation. The resultant protein lysates were precipitated using TCA/acetone and resuspended in 8 M Urea. After DTT reduction and IAA-mediated alkylation
[63], sequencing grade trypsin combined with ProteaseMax surfactant was added. Digested samples were desalted prior to analysis using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific). All peptide mixtures were analysed via a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano. LC gradients ran from 14–35%B (A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, B: 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 2 h, and data was collected using a Top15 method for MS/MS scans. Comparative proteome abundance and data analysis was performed using MaxQuant software (Version 1.3.0.5)
[64], with Andromeda used for database searching and Perseus (Version 1.4.1.3) used to organise the data. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-termini were set as variable modifications. The maximum peptide/protein false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 1% based on comparison to a reverse database. The Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to generate normalised spectral intensities and infer relative protein abundance. Proteins that matched to a contaminants database or the reverse database were removed and proteins were only retained in final analysis if detected in at least three replicates from at least one sample. Quantitative analysis was performed using a t-test to compare pairs of samples, and proteins with significant change in abundance (p value <0.05; fold change ≥2) were included in the quantitative results. Qualitative analysis was also performed, to detect proteins that were found in at least 3 replicates of a particular sample, but undetectable in the comparitor sample. Secondary metabolite analysis A. fumigatus wild-type and ∆gliT46645 were cultured in Czapeks-Dox broth for 96 h at 37°C at 200 rpm in duplicate. Culture supernatants were organically extracted using an equal volume of chloroform and the extracts were dried by rota-evaporation and resuspended in methanol. Extracts were diluted 1/10 in 0.01% formic acid prior to analysis by LC-MS as described previously
[2]. Cell viability analysis Following culturing and treatment as described above, mycelia were removed from the culture supernatant and washed with water. They were resuspended in 10 mM HEPES before aliquots were plated on Sabouraud dextrose agar and incubated at 37°C for 24 h. Viability was recorded.