Methods Media, growth conditions, strains, plasmids, and oligos Chemical sensitivity screens used LB Lennox agar plates (1% (w/v) tryptone, 0.5% (w/v) yeast extract, 90 mM sodium chloride, 2% (w/v) bacto agar) unless otherwise specified. M9 minimal plates used in the screen contained M9 salts, 0.2% (w/v) glucose, and 2% (w/v) bacto agar. Media for kasugamycin and blasticidin S sensitivity was M9 minimal supplemented with metal cations and buffered at pH 7.5 (M9 salts, 0.4% (w/v) glucose, 100 μM magnesium sulfate, 100 μM calcium chloride, 5 μM iron(III) chloride, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5). To promote high translation rates, media used for 35S-methionine incorporation was MOPS EZ rich (-Met), 0.4% (w/v) glucose (Teknova M2101, M2102, M2103, M2109, G0520). Ordered libraries grown during the chemical-genomics screens were incubated at 37°C until the majority of colonies reached a defined size (~8 hours) then a photograph was taken of the plate. Spot-dilution plates were grown roughly 24 hours at 37°C before a photograph was taken. For MIC determination, cultures were grown in deep 96-well plates for 24 hours in an Infors-HT shaker, 900 r.p.m., 37°C. For 35S-methionine incorporation, cultures were grown at 37°C in baffled flasks in a gyrotory® water bath shaker at 350 r.p.m. Strains used in this study are listed (S2 Table). The KEIO deletion library is derived from BW25113 (F- λ- Δ(araD-araB)657 ΔlacZ4787(::rrnB-3) rph-1 Δ(rhaD-rhaB)568 hsdR514) [60]. All experiments subsequent to the chemical-genomics screen were conducted using strains of MG1655 (F- λ-
ilvG-
rfb-50 rph-1) [61]. Operon deletions were generated using λ-red recombineering to replace the operon with a kanamycin resistance cassette amplified from pKD4. The resistance cassette was subsequently excised to generate deletions with a single FRT site as a scar. Plasmids and oligonucleotides used in the study are listed (S2 Table). Data collection and processing The chemical genomics screen was conducted using the same methodology as reported previously [8] with few modifications. Ordered libraries were arrayed on rectangular agar plates, grown in the presence of antibiotic or other stress until the colonies reached a defined average size, and then imaged. One condition, 4°C survival, involved growth of colonies on LB plates at 37°C for 6 hours, and transfer of the colony array to 4°C for 5 weeks. Colonies were then pinned onto a fresh plate and surviving cells were allowed to grow for 6 hours at 37°C before being imaged. Plate photographs were taken with a Canon Powershot G10, using an in-house assembly to control plate illumination. Images were analyzed using Iris to measure the total intensity of pixels within the colony to calculate an opacity metric. Data filtering, normalization, and calculation of the fitness-score was conducted using an in-house analysis pipeline. Code for the analysis is available online (https://github.com/AnthonyShiverMicrobes/fitness_score.git). Steps added to the original analysis pipeline [18] include simultaneous input and analysis of colony size, opacity, and circularity from Iris (read_data.m), manual removal of data based on plate position (to eliminate false positives from minor pinning problems) (filter_data.m), higher-order surface normalization (incorporating a quartic smoothing function that better describes the systematic errors due to pinning effects for E. coli) (smooth_data.m), power-transformation of the data (to reduce variability of extreme values) (transform_data.m), and variance normalization of the data (to improve reproducibility of measurements between plates) (RC4_scale.m). The raw data and metadata files for this analysis are available online (http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.f3kc0). Clustering, significant phenotypes and correlations, and network analysis Unreliable measurements were removed from the dataset at multiple points in the analysis and each condition had a different number of measurements (fitness-scores) that passed analysis. Before data integration and clustering were performed, conditions and strains with less than 75% reliable measurements were removed from analysis. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the Cluster 3.0 [62] command line interface, using Pearson’s correlation and average-value linkage. Data was visualized using Java Treeview [63]. To predict reliable phenotypes and pairwise correlations, we used the method described by Nichols et al. [8] to determine the false-discovery rate (FDR), defined as the fraction of positive test results that are expected to be due to type I error, and set a cut-off for the fitness-score that reflected an FDR of 5%. Using this method, 95% of the cutoff values for negative (sensitization) fitness-scores fell in the range (-2.0,-1.2) while 95% of the cutoff values for positive (resistance) fitness-scores fell in the range (+1.2,+2.1). To identify gene sets enriched for cold-sensitivity at 10°C, we used Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) [64,65] of the fitness-scores for 10°C. We grouped genes according to the functional categories of their COG assignments. Input files for this analysis are available online at (http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.f3kc0). MIC determination A liquid-broth dilution method was used to determine MIC values for the antibiotics. Fresh colonies were picked, resuspended in minimal media, and diluted to a final O.D.450 of 5x10-4. Antibiotics were added in a 1:2 dilution series spanning a 64-fold dilution range. After 24 hours of growth, 150uL of culture was transferred to a 96-well spectrophotometer plate, and the O.D.450 was measured using a Varioskan spectrophotometer (Thermo electron corporation). After blank subtraction, culture densities were normalized to a no drug control, and the concentration of the first drug dilution step at which the normalized culture density fell below 10% was defined as the MIC of the drug. This quantitative measure corresponded well with a qualitative metric based on pelleting the cells and visually inspecting the size of cell pellet. 35S-Methionine incorporation Overnight cultures of relevant strains were grown inoculated into MOPS rich defined methionine dropout media (MOPS RDM-Met) at a starting O.D.450 of 5x10-3 and grown to an O.D.450 of 0.2. To quantify translation rate, 900 μL of culture was added to 30 μL of labeling mix (10 μCi L-35S-methionine, 50 μM cold L-methionine, in MOPS RDM-Met) (Easytag L-35S-Methionine, Perkin Elmer Corp.), incubated for 1 min in the water bath, then quenched with 100 μL of 50%(w/v) trichloroacetate (TCA) and stored on ice. A 100 μL aliquot of the quenched reaction mixture was deposited on a glass fiber filter (Merck Millipore Ltd. APFC02500) and washed with 10% (w/v) TCA followed by 95% (v/v) ethanol. 35S-methionine incorporation into the TCA-insoluble fraction was quantified on a scintillation counter (Beckman Coulter LS6500 multipurpose scintillation counter). To follow translation inhibition, saturating concentrations of antibiotics were added to growing cultures. Translation rate was quantified in intervals following addition of drug and normalized to a timepoint taken two minutes before drug treatment. Data was fit to a double exponential decay function (kasugamycin treatment) or single exponential decay function (blasticidin S, kanamycin, spectinomycin) using QtiPlot [66]. OppA purification and binding assays The oppA gene from E. coli MG1655 was amplified and cloned into pBAD22 [67] using NcoI and HindIII restriction enzymes. E. coli BW25113 was then transformed with the resulting plasmid, and over-production was induced in an exponentially growing culture at O.D.600 of 0.6 by addition of 0.05% (w/v) arabinose. The purification, including partial unfolding of the protein to remove bound substrates, as well as the binding assays followed the protocol in Klepsch et al. [42]. The changes made were clearing of the lysate for 1 hour at 140,000 g (Beckman L8-M ultracentrifuge), replacement of guanidinium hydrochloride with urea for partial unfolding of OppA, and adjusting the 4-morpholineethanesulfonic acid (MES) buffer to a pH of 6.7 instead of 6.0 during purification to increase stability. OppA was highly concentrated and free of visible protein contaminations after Ni-IMAC as judged by SDS-PAGE and staining with Coomassie Blue, and was thus used in binding assays after extensive buffer exchange to remove the imidazole (Milipore Amicon Ultra centrifugation filters, 10,000 MWCO). The spectral characteristics of purified OppA were identical to those reported previously. All Fluorescence assays (Fluoromax-3, Jobin Yvon Horiba) were performed in 20 mM MES pH 6.0 and 150 mM sodium chloride, as described [42]. Data for the normalized change in intrinsic fluorescence was fit to a quadratic function that models ligand depletion [68] in QtiPlot [66].