Materials and Methods Strains and Culture Conditions Escherichia coli Top10 (ThermoFischer scientific, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was used for all cloning purposes and was grown in lysogeny broth (LB) or on LB agar (LB broth with 1.5% w/v agar) at 37°C. Saccharomyces cerevisiae AH109 and S. cerevisiae Y187 (BD Bioscience) were used in the yeast two-hybrid screen. After transformation, all yeast strains were grown at 30°C on Synthetic Defined (SD) medium (Roucourt et al., 2009), with omission of specific amino acids, dependent on the desired selection, as shown below. Cloning Procedures Open reading frames (ORFs) containing the various domains and inter and intraconnective regions of the kalimantacin assembly line were amplified from the genomic DNA of P. fluorescens BCCM_ID9359 using Phusion® High Fidelity DNA polymerase (ThermoFischer scientific). An overview of the primers and the length of the corresponding fragments can be found in Supplementary Table S1. The PCR fragments were inserted in the pCRTM8/GW/TOPO® vector (ThermoFischer scientific) by A-overhang ligation. Subsequently, transfer of coding fragments from the TOPO vector to the GatewayTM compatible bait (pGBT9) and prey (pGAD424) vectors (Clontech) was realized using Gateway® LR ClonaseTM Enzyme Mix, following the manufacturer’s protocol. All constructs were verified by Sanger sequencing (GATC Biotech). Yeast Two-Hybrid Interaction Analysis Saccharomyces cerevisiae AH109 (Mata) and S. cerevisiae Y187 (Matα) were transformed with bait and prey vectors, respectively. Transformation of the constructs was performed on 96-well scale, using the protocol of Rajagopala and Uetz (2011). Both yeast strains are auxotrophic for tryptophan, leucine, histidine and adenine. Selection for yeast cells containing the bait vector was performed on SD media lacking Trp, while media without Leu were used for prey selection. Autoactivation of bait constructs was verified by an assay using empty prey vector and prey vector with an unrelated gene from Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1, mvaT. In this assay, the concentration of 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole (3-AT) necessary to reduce leaky expression of reporter genes was optimized at 3 mM. The actual Gal4p-based yeast two-hybrid screening was performed by an eight-clone pooled, array-based mating screening. First, the bait clones were pooled in groups of eight in such way that every clone was represented in two pools. These pools were mated with the entire prey array, resulting in diploid yeast cells containing one bait and one prey vector. The diploid yeast cells were spotted on SD media lacking histidine and adenine to screen for activation of HIS3 and ADE2. 3-AT and 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indoyl-α-D-galactopyranoside (X-α-gal) were independently added to the selective media, minimizing leaky expression of HIS3 and enabling detection of α-galactosidase activity by expression of MEL1. The reciprocal screening, prey pool – bait array, was also performed. Positive interactions were independently confirmed by co-transformation of S. cerevisiae AH109 with bait and prey constructs followed by spotting on selective media in twofold dilution series. Finally, the level of the detected protein interactions was quantified using an α-galactosidase assay (Clontech Laboratories, 2009).