Materials and methods Bacterial strains, plasmids and culture conditions Dehydrated media components and reagents were purchased from VWR International, Fisher Scientific or Sigma-Aldrich (Canada). Details of bacterial strains and plasmids used in the current study are described in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. Escherichia coli and S. clavuligerus cultures were grown and manipulated as described previously [31, 32]. Other Streptomyces species were cultured using tryptic soy broth (TSB) or ISP4 media, whereas S. viridis was grown in nutrient broth (BD, Canada). Unless otherwise specified, all E. coli, Streptomyces and S. viridis cultures were grown at 37, 28 and 42°C, respectively. Appropriate antibiotics were included in the media when required [31, 33], and liquid cultures were agitated at 200 rpm. For assessment of metabolite production, S. clavuligerus strains were grown in duplicate in starch asparagine (SA) or soy fermentation media as described previously [19]. All production phenotypes were verified using at least two independent fermentations. Bacterial strains used in the current study. Bacterial strain Antibiotic resistance marker(s)a Description Source/Referenceb. Escherichia coli strains. E. coli NEB5α NA DH5α derived cloning host NEB. E. coli BL21(DE3) NA Host for protein expression NEB. E. coli ET12567(pUZ8002) CamR, KanR DNA methylation deficient conjugation host containing the plasmid pUZ8002 [33]. E. coli BW25118 (pIJ790) CamR, KanR Host containing the plasmid pIJ790 for λ RED mediated ReDirect PCR targeting of genes [34]. E. coli DH5α (BT340) AmpR, CamR Strain containing plasmid BT340 used for expressing the FLP recombinase [35]. Streptomyces and other strains. Streptomyces clavuligerus NRRL 3585 NA Wild type; cephamycin and clavulanic acid producer NRRL. Streptomyces clavuligerus Δcpe::apra AprR cpe deletion mutant; gene replaced by disruption cassette from plasmid pIJ773 This study. Streptomyces clavuligerus Δcpe-INF NA cpe deletion mutant; gene replaced by 81bp marker less in-frame scar sequence This study. Streptomyces flavogriseus ATCC 33331 NA Wild type; clavulanic acid non-producer ATCC. Saccharomonospora viridis ATCC 15386 NA Wild type; clavulanic acid non-producer ATCC. Streptomyces katsurahamanus NA Wild type; cephamycin and clavulanic acid producer [12]. Streptomyces jumonjinensis NA Wild type; cephamycin and clavulanic acid producer [12]. Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC 15380 NA Indicator organism for clavulanic acid bioassays [32]. a AmpR, ampicillin resistance; AprR, apramycin resistance; CamR, chloramphenicol resistance; KanR, kanamycin resistance; NA, Not applicable. b ATCC, American Type Culture Collection; NEB, New England Biolabs; NRRL, Northern Regional Research Laboratory. Plasmids and cosmids used in the current study. Plasmid/cosmid Antibiotic resistance marker(s)a Description Source/Reference. pGEMT-Easy AmpR General E. coli cloning vector Promega. pET30b KanR E. coli protein expression vector Novagen. pHM11a HygR Integrative Streptomyces expression vector containing the constitutive ermEp* [36]. pSET152 AprR Integrative Streptomyces cloning vector [37]. pIJ773 AprR Template plasmid for preparing the ReDirect apra disruption cassette [34]. pIJ10700 HygR Template plasmid for preparing the ReDirect hyg disruption cassette [34]. pET30b-cpeSc KanR Plasmid vector used to express C-terminal 6×His-tagged Cpe in E. coli for purification This study. 12B8 AmpR, KanR Cosmid clone containing the clavulanic acid biosynthetic gene cluster from S. clavuligerus [19]. 12B8-Δcpe::apra AprR, AmpR, KanR Mutant cosmid 12B8 in which cpe has been replaced by the disruption cassette from plasmid pIJ773 using the ReDirect system This study. 12B8-Δcpe-INF AmpR, KanR Mutant cosmid 12B8 in which cpe has been replaced by the 81-bp in-frame “scar” sequence using the ReDirect system This study. 12B8-Δcpe-INF-Δamp::hyg HygR, KanR Cosmid 12B8-Δcpe-INF in which ampicillin resistance gene replaced by the hyg cassette from plasmid pIJ10700 using the ReDirect system This study. pHM:cpeSc HygR Expression plasmid pHM11a containing cpe from S. clavuligerus This study. pHM:cpeSf HygR Expression plasmid pHM11a containing cpe from S. flavogriseus This study. pHM:cpeSv HygR Expression plasmid pHM11a containing cpe from S. viridis This study. pHM:cpeSj HygR Expression plasmid pHM11a containing cpe from S. jumonjinensis This study. pHM:cpeSk HygR Expression plasmid pHM11a containing cpe from S. katsurahamanus This study. pHM:blipFLAG HygR Expression plasmid pHM11a containing blip from S. clavuligerus with a C-terminal FLAG tag This study. pHM:ccaRFLAG HygR Expression plasmid pHM11a containing ccaR from S. clavuligerus with a C-terminal FLAG tag This study. pHM:cpeSc-FLAG HygR Expression plasmid pHM11a containing cpe from S. clavuligerus with a C-terminal FLAG tag This study. pHM:cpeSc-6×his HygR Expression plasmid pHM11a containing cpe from S. clavuligerus with a C-terminal 6×His tag This study. pHM:cpeCt HygR Expression plasmid pHM11a containing the C-terminal domain of cpe from S. clavuligerus This study. pHM:cpeNt HygR Expression plasmid pHM11a containing the N-terminal domain of cpe from S. clavuligerus This study. pHM-cpeCt+Nt HygR Expression plasmid pHM11a containing the N-terminal and C- terminal domains of cpe from S. clavuligerus, each expressed independently under the control of the ermEp* This study. pSET:cpeSc AprR Plasmid pSET152 containing the S. clavuligerus cpe gene along with ermEp* from pHM11a was used as template to prepare all described cpeSc site directed mutants This study. aAmpR, ampicillin resistance; AprR, apramycin resistance; KanR, kanamycin resistance, HygR, hygromycin resistance. DNA isolation, manipulation and analysis All oligonucleotide primers used in the current study were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (USA) and are listed in S1, S2 and S3 Tables. Standard techniques were used to introduce, isolate, manipulate and analyze plasmid DNA from E. coli (35). Restriction enzymes used in the study were purchased from New England Biolabs Ltd. (Canada). Chromosomal DNA was isolated from Streptomyces and S. viridis cultures using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Canada) and a SpeedMill PLUS Bead Homogenizer (Analytik Jena, Germany), which was also used in all subsequent bead-beating purposes. PCR was performed using either the Fisher BioReagents Taq DNA polymerase or the Phusion High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase kits (Fisher Scientific, Canada) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, except that 5% DMSO was included in problematic reactions. DNA fragments were purified after standard TBE agarose gel electrophoresis using the EZ-10 Spin Column DNA Gel Extraction Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Bio Basic Canada Inc.). Unless otherwise specified, all PCR products were cloned into the pGEM-T Easy vector (Promega, USA) and the DNA sequences of all inserts were determined at the Centre for Applied Genomics, University of Toronto, Canada. Plasmid and cosmid constructs were introduced into S. clavuligerus through intergeneric conjugation using E. coli ET12567/pUZ8002 as described previously [19, 33]. Preparation of the S. clavuligerus Δcpe::apra and Δcpe-INF mutants The pWE15 vector based cosmid clone 12B8 (Table 2) containing the entire clavulanic acid gene cluster was used to prepare the S. clavuligerus Δcpe mutants according to the previously described ReDirect PCR-Targeting method [19, 34]. Specific oligonucleotide primers (S1 Table) along with pIJ773 as template were used to amplify a PCR product containing the apramycin resistance cassette (apra) to target cpe in 12B8. This led to the replacement of an internal fragment of cpe by the apra disruption cassette to give the mutant cosmid 12B8-Δcpe::apra. In addition, the apra cassette comprising the aac3(IV) gene and RK2 oriT flanked by FLP recombinase target sites (FRT), was inserted in the direction opposite to cpe transcription in the mutant cosmid. 12B8-Δcpe::apra was then introduced into wt S. clavuligerus for double homologous recombination and isolation of the apramycin resistant, Δcpe::apra mutant. In order to prepare the in-frame (INF) marker-less Δcpe-INF mutant, cosmid 12B8-Δcpe::apra from above was introduced in E. coli DH5α/BT340, which expresses the FLP recombinase [35]. FLP caused the excision of the FRT-flanked apra cassette in 12B8-Δcpe::apra, leaving an 81-bp in-frame DNA sequence (“scar”) in its place in the mutant cosmid 12B8-Δcpe-INF (Table 2). Since oriT is part of the apra cassette, it was also lost, and 12B8-Δcpe-INF could not be transferred to S. clavuligerus via conjugation. Therefore, an oriT was introduced into 12B8-Δcpe-INF using a second round of ReDirect PCR-Targeting [34]. Specified primers (S1 Table) were used along with pIJ10700 as a template to amplify a PCR product containing the hygromycin resistance cassette (hyg) to target the ampicillin resistance gene present on the pWE15 vector backbone of 12B8-Δcpe-INF. The resulting cosmid 12B8-Δcpe-INF-Δamp::hyg (Table 2), containing the hyg cassette (which in turn contains an oriT) in place of the ampicillin resistance gene, was transferred to the S. clavuligerus Δcpe::apra mutant by conjugation with E. coli. Hygromycin-resistant colonies that arose were then made to undergo sporulation without any antibiotic selection to isolate the apramycin and hygromycin sensitive S. clavuligerus Δcpe-INF mutant. The replacement of the wt cpe gene with Δcpe::apra and Δcpe-INF in the respective S. clavuligerus mutants was confirmed by genomic DNA PCR and sequencing of products using specific primers (S1 Table). Preparation of cpe complementation plasmids Specific oligonucleotide primers (S1 Table) with engineered NdeI and HindIII/BamHI restriction sites were used to PCR amplify DNA fragments containing the cpe genes from S. clavuligerus (Sc), S. jumonjinensis (Sj), S. katsurahamanus (Sk), S. flavogriseus (Sf) and S. viridis (Sv) for complementation studies. Since the sequences of cpe from S. jumonjinensis and S. katsurahamanus were not know, degenerate oligonucleotide primers with engineered restriction sites were designed based on known cpe DNA sequences from the three other species. After PCR amplification, the DNA fragments were directly cloned into the NdeI and HindIII/BamHI sites of the Streptomyces expression plasmid pHM11a [36] to give pHM:cpeSj, pHM:cpeSk, pHM:cpeSf and pHM:cpeSv (Table 2). The DNA sequences of all inserts were also verified/determined for comparison using custom primers (S1 Table). To examine the in vivo roles of the N- and C-terminal domains of CpeSc, custom oligonucleotide primers were used to amplify DNA fragments containing each domain separately (S1 Table). The respective PCR fragments were cloned into pHM11a at NdeI and BamHI after their sequences had been verified to give pHM:cpeNt and pHM:cpeCt, which functioned as the CpeSc N- and C-terminal domain expression constructs, respectively (Table 2). To prepare a construct that could express the two domains separately at the same time from a single plasmid, the insert from pHM:cpeCt was released as a BglII-BamHI fragment and ligated to BamHI-digested pHM:cpeNt. This led to the plasmid pHM:cpeNt+Ct, in which the expression of each domain (not as part of the same protein) was driven independently by ermEp* (Table 2). Plasmid constructs were introduced into either the S. clavuligerus Δcpe::apra and/or Δcpe-INF mutants for complementation studies. Detection and localization of CpeSc in S. clavuligerus Engineered oligonucleotide primers were used to add C-terminal FLAG tags onto Cpe, CcaR and Blip (S1 Table). PCR fragments containing the three respective genes (cpeSc-FLAG, ccaRFLAG and blipFLAG) were cloned into pHM11a and introduced into wt S. clavuligerus for localization studies (Table 2). One hundred milliliters S. clavuligerus SA cultures expressing each protein were separately grown for 48 hours, after which the cultures were subjected to centrifugation and the mycelial pellets were separated from the supernatants. Cell pellets were resuspended in 5 ml of lysis buffer (150 mM HEPES and 150 mM NaCl) and were sonicated on ice using a 5/64-inch probe (VWR International, Canada). The lysates were centrifuged at high-speed (27,000 × g) for 15 minutes to clarify the cytoplasmic fraction contained in the supernatants for subsequent use. Approximately 87 ml of culture supernatant (separated from the above mycelial pellet in the first step) was centrifuged at 27,000 × g for 15 minutes and was then filtered through 0.2 μm vacuum membranes (VWR International, Canada) to remove any residual particulate or insoluble material. To precipitate secreted proteins, 44.9 g of ammonium sulfate was added gradually to 500 ml of the filtered supernatant (final volume is made up by using lysis buffer) with constant stirring at 4°C to give 80% saturation. Precipitated protein fractions were collected by high-speed centrifugation as described above, after which the supernatant was discarded, and the protein pellet was left to air dry for 10 minutes. The pellet was then resuspended in 500 μl of 1M phosphate buffer (sodium phosphate, pH-7.0) for future analysis. C-terminal 6×His tagged protein (CpeSc-6×His) was also expressed in S. clavuligerus and E. coli. Engineered oligonucleotide primers were used to introduce a C-terminal 6×His tag during the amplification of cpeSc (S1 Table), which was cloned into pHM11a for expression in S. clavuligerus. For expressing CpeSc-6×His in E. coli, the gene was PCR amplified using primers listed in S1 Table, was cloned into pET30b for expression at 15°C for 24 hours. CpeSc-6×His protein was purified using Ni-NTA resin as per the manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen, USA) and was stored in 20 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl (pH 7.6) + 20% (v/v) glycerol. For western analysis, 20–50 μg of cell-free extract or 0.5–1 μg of purified CpeSc-6×His was subjected to standard 12% SDS-PAGE before being transferred to Immobilon-P PVDF membranes according to the manufacturer’s recommendations (Millipore, Canada). Membranes were washed with TBS-T buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.5% v/v Tween-20) and were blocked overnight at 4°C in blocking buffer (TBS-T with 10% w/v non-fat milk). The membranes were probed using anti-FLAG or anti-6×His antibodies (Thermo Scientific Pierce, USA) at 1:500 final dilutions before being washed several times with TBS-T buffer. The secondary antibody (Thermo Scientific Pierce, USA) was added at 1:400 dilution in TBS-T buffer and the membranes were processed using the ECL Western Blot Substrate (Promega, USA) for imaging using a GE ImageQuant LAS 4000 Digital Imaging System (GE Healthcare, USA). RNA isolation and RT-PCR analysis S. clavuligerus wt and Δcpe-INF strains were used to isolate RNA after 48 hours of growth in SA medium using the innuSPEED Bacteria/Fungi RNA Kit and a bead beater as per the manufacturer’s instructions (Analytik Jena, Germany). The cDNA was synthesized using 500 ng of DNaseI-treated RNA using random hexameric primers provided with the SuperScript II reverse transcriptase (RT) kit as per the manufacturer’s recommendations (Invitrogen, USA). PCR was performed using 2.5μl of the RT product from above in a final volume of 20μl using the GoTaq DNA Polymerase (Promega, Canada). Thirty cycle PCR was performed to detect ceaS2, oat2, oppA1, claR, car, cyp, cpe (orf12), orf13, orf14, oppA2, orf16, gcas, pbpA, and hrdB cDNA using gene-specific primers (S2 Table). Control reactions contained DNaseI-treated RNA preparations without reverse transcription for each reaction. Site-directed mutagenesis of CpeSc The cpeSc gene along with the ermEp* from pHM11a was isolated as a BglII/BamHI fragment and inserted into the BamHI site of pSET152 (45) to prepare a smaller expression plasmid (pSET:cpeSc), which would be more amenable for site-directed mutagenesis (Table 2). The QuikChange II Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Agilent Technologies, USA) along with mutagenic oligonucleotide primers (S3 Table) and pSET:cpeSc as template was to prepare selected single amino acid variants of CpeSc according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All introduced mutations were verified by DNA sequencing, and plasmids expressing CpeSc variants (Table 2) were introduced into the S. clavuligerus Δcpe-INF mutant for complementation studies. Metabolite detection and analysis S. clavuligerus strains were grown for fermentation studies and culture supernatants were assessed for clavulanic acid production using bioassays as described previously [32]. High-performance liquid chromatography analysis of imidazole-derivatized culture supernatants was performed using a 1260 Infinity system (Agilent Technologies, USA) and a Bondclone C18 (100×8mm, 10μm, 148Å) column (Phenomenex, USA) [23]. Selected supernatants were also analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry on an LC-MS-Trap system (1100 LC-MS Agilent Technologies, USA) as previously described [23, 38], with the exception that an Xterra (2.1×150 mm, 3.5μm, 125Å) column (Waters Scientific, USA) was used in the analysis.