Materials and methods Samples collection Sandstones were collected in triplicate at Finger Mt. (1720 m a.s.l., McMurdo Dry Valleys, Southern Victoria Land, Continental Antarctica) both from north (77°45’0.93"S 160°44'45.2"E) and south (77°45’10"S 160°44'44.39.7"E) exposed surfaces by Laura Selbmann during the XXXI Italian Antarctic Expedition (Dec. 2015-Jan. 2016) (Fig 1). Samples have been collected in the frame of Italian National Antarctic Research Program (PNRA) projects. Sampling permits have been obtained for activity in Special Managed Areas (ASMA) and Special Protected Areas (ASPA) in compliance with the "Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty" Annex V, art.7. 10.1371/journal.pone.0233805.g001Fig 1A) Finger Mt. landscape: the yellow arrow indicates the north exposed surface, while the white arrow indicates the south exposed surface; B) north exposed sandstone rock; C) south exposed sandstone rock. A) Finger Mt. landscape: the yellow arrow indicates the north exposed surface, while the white arrow indicates the south exposed surface; B) north exposed sandstone rock; C) south exposed sandstone rock. The presence of endolithic colonization was assessed by direct observation in situ using magnification lenses. Rocks were excised using a geological hammer, placed in sterile bags and shipped at -20°C at the at University of Tuscia (Italy) where have been preserved at -20°C in the Mycological Section of the Italian Antarctic National Museum (MNA), until processing. Metabolites extraction Classical metabolomics extraction protocol was adapted to rock sample. The frozen samples were powdered in liquid nitrogen. Ultrasonic crushing was performed at a low temperature, two times for 30 min. One gram of each rock was added to 3000 μl of a chloroform/methanol/water (1:3:1 ratio) solvent mixture stored at -20°C. Briefly, samples were vortexed for 5 min and left on ice for 2 h for total protein precipitation. Solutions were then centrifuged for 15 min at 15,000×g. and were dried to obtain visible pellets. Finally, the dried samples were re-suspended in 0.1 mL of RNA/DNAse free water, 5% formic acid and transferred to glass autosampler vials for LC/MS analysis. Extraction was performed in triplicate. Ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography Twenty uL of each extracted supernatant sample were injected into an ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo): samples were loaded onto a Reprosil C18 column (2.0mm× 150 mm, 2.5 μm-DrMaisch, Germany) for metabolite separation. Chromatographic separations were made at flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. A 0–100% linear gradient of solvent A (ddH2O, 0.1% formic acid) to B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) was employed over 20 min, returning to 100% A in 2 min and holding solvent A for a 6-min post time hold. The UHPLC system was coupled online with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Rockford, IL) scanning in full MS mode (2 μ scans) at resolution of 70,000 in the 67 to 1,000 m/z range, with 3.8 kV spray voltage, 40 sheath gas, and 25 auxiliary gas. The system was operated in positive ion mode. Calibration was performed before each analysis against positive or negative ion mode calibration mixes (Thermo Fisher) to ensure error of the intact mass within the sub ppm range. Metabolite assignments were performed using MAVEN v5.2 [40]. Each replicate was analysed separately and a p-value < 0.01 was used to infer significance for all abundance comparisons between sets of triplicates. Data elaboration and statistical analysis Replicate files were processed through MAVEN v5.2, enabling rapid and reliable metabolites quantitation from multiple reaction-monitoring data or high-resolution full-scan mass spectrometry data. Mass Spectrometry chromatograms were created for peak alignment, matching and comparison of parent and fragment ions with tentative metabolite identification within a 2-p.p.m. mass-deviation range between the observed and expected results against an imported KEGG database [41]. To visualize the number of significant changes m/z values between metabolites datasets, a Volcano plot were created using the MetaboAnalyst 4.0 software (http://metpa.metabolomics.ca/). Raw data were normalized by sum and auto-scaling in order to increase the importance of low-abundance ions without significant amplification of noise. This type of plot displays the fold change differences and the statistical significance for each variable. The log of the fold change is plotted on the x-axis so that changes in both directions (up and down) appear equidistant from the centre. The y-axis displays the negative log of the p-value from a two-sample t-test. False discovery rate (FDR) [42] were used for controlling multiple testing. Metabolites subject to major changes were displayed and Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC) curves for each of them was calculated using the same software to evaluate potential metabolites to be considered as biomarkers. A ROC diagram plots the true positive rate (sensitivity) of a test on the y-axis against the false positive rate (100-specificity) on the x-axis, yielding the ROC area under the curve (AUC). Within this model, the ROC curves used 5-fold cross validation. AUC can be interpreted as the probability that a test or a classifier will rank a randomly chosen positive instance higher than a randomly chosen negative one. If all positive samples are ranked before negative ones (i.e. a perfect classifier), the AUC is 1.0. An AUC of 0.5 is equivalent to randomly classifying subjects as either positive or negative (i.e. the classifier is of no practical utility). Metabolic pathways were displayed with Graphpad Prism v5.01 (Graphpad Software Inc) and statistical analyses were performed with the same software (p < 0.05). Data are presented as mean ± SD. Differences were considered statistically significant at *p < 0.05 and further stratified to **p < 0.01, respectively.