Materials and methods Plant materials In this study, the O. pumila plants originated from Fujian Province of China and were cultivated in a greenhouse at Zhejiang Chinese Medical University. The O. pumila plantlets used for analysis of tissue expression patterns and hairy-root transformation were obtained and cultured in solid B5 medium as previously reported7. Three different tissues of two-month-old O. pumila sterile plants (roots, stems and leaves) were separately collected for tissue expression pattern analyses of OpWRKY2 and OpTDC and camptothecin content detection in different tissues. Different O. pumila hairy-root lines were inoculated and cultured in liquid B5 medium at 120 rpm in darkness at 25 °C. Nicotiana benthamiana plants used for subcellular localization analyses of OpWRKY2 protein and dual-luciferase (Dual-LUC) assays to detect the activation of OpWRKY2 were grown in pots containing soil mixture and placed in a growth chamber under a light/dark photoperiod of 16/8 h at 25 °C23. Hairy roots at different growth stages and phytohormone treatments For analysis of growth phenotype and camptothecin production in O. pumila hairy roots, 0.2 g of fresh C58C1 hairy-root lines (infected with modified Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain C58C1) with uniform growth were inoculated in B5 liquid medium and cultured for 60 days7,15. Hairy roots and culture medium were harvested at 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 days and used to detect gene expression and metabolite levels. For the analysis of OpWRKY2 gene expression in response to plant hormones, C58C1 hairy-root lines were cultured for 30 days and subsequently treated with 50 μM salicylic acid (SA), 50 μM gibberellin (GA3), 100 μM abscisic acid (ABA), and 200 μM methyl jasmonate (MeJA)5. An equivalent volume of ethanol was used as a control. The hairy roots were harvested at 0, 0.5, 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12 h post hormone application and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for further quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analyses. Plant RNA extraction and qRT-PCR analyses Total RNA of all samples was extracted using the Plant RNAprep Pure Kit (Tiangen, Beijing, China). cDNA synthesis from total RNA and qRT-PCR analyses of all gene transcripts were performed as previously described24. The housekeeping gene OpActin in O. pumila was used as an internal control gene in qRT-PCR for normalization of all samples. All gene-specific primer sequences of all camptothecin biosynthesis pathway genes and OpWRKY genes used for qRT-PCR analyses are listed in Table S1. The relative gene expression values in all samples were calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt method. All qRT-PCR analyses of each sample were performed for three biological replicates. Bioinformatics analysis The bioinformatics analyses were performed as previously described25. WRKY homologues were identified in the O. pumila root and hairy-root transcriptome sequences generated by our laboratory using the hidden Markov model (HMM) search and BLASTx program with an E-value < 10−5
8,25. Redundant sequences were manually removed. All OpWRKY proteins in O. pumila were aligned using the ClustalW program with the default parameters26. The phylogenetic tree of all OpWRKY proteins in O. pumila was constructed and performed using the neighbor-joining method with MEGA5 software27. The bootstrap values were calculated from 1000 replicates to analyze and assess the accuracy of the phylogeny. Subcellular localization To analyze the subcellular localization of the OpWRKY2 protein, the open reading frame (ORF) was amplified by PCR from the O. pumila hairy-root cDNA library with OpWRKY2 gene-specific primers (Table S2) and inserted into the modified plant expression vector pHB-YFP (yellow fluorescent protein) to generate the pHB-OpWRKY2-YFP construct. The pHB-YFP construct without OpWRKY2 was used as the negative control. The plasmids pHB-OpWRKY2-YFP and pHB-YFP were introduced into the A. tumefaciens strain GV3101 and transiently infected the epidermal cells of 5-week-old N. benthamiana leaves. YFP signals were analyzed using an LSM880 confocal laser microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany) 48 h post infection, and three biological replicates were performed to confirm the results as reported previously23,28. Generation of OpWRKY2 transgenic O. pumila hairy roots The full-length OpWRKY2 ORF fragment was amplified with Spe I and BstE II restriction sites and inserted into the previously modified pCAMBIA2300+ plant expression vector to obtain the pCAMBIA2300+-OpWRKY2 construct, which was used for overexpression of OpWRKY2 in O. pumila hairy roots (Fig. S1a)7,15. Chimeric repressor silencing by using the EAR motif repression domain (SRDX) is a very common technique that is widely used to study the function of transcription factors29. It is very useful not only for the rapid analysis of the function of redundant transcription factors but also for the manipulation of biological traits via the suppression of gene expression that is regulated by specific transcription factors29. In this study, to further examine the function of OpWRKY2, the DNA sequence encoding the SRDX repressor domain (LDLDLELRLGFA) was fused to the C-terminus of OpWRKY2 and inserted into the modified pCAMBIA2300+ to generate the pCAMBIA2300+-OpWRKY2-SRDX construct (Fig. S1b)16,29. The pCAMBIA2300+ empty vector without OpWRKY2 was used as the control. All plasmids were transferred into the disarmed A. tumefaciens strain C58C1, harboring the Agrobacterium rhizogenes Ri plasmid pRiA4, and subsequently transformed into O. pumila stems to generate O. pumila transgenic hairy-root lines7,15. The screening of transformed hairy-root cultures was carried out on B5 medium plates. The positive transgenic hairy-root lines (OpWRKY2-OE and OpWRKY2-SRDX) were verified via PCR amplification of hairy-root genomic DNA. Primers used for PCR amplification of positive transgenic hairy roots were designed to cover the OpWRKY2 gene and partial pCAMBIA2300+ vector sequences and are listed in Table S2. Positive transgenic hairy roots were further inoculated and cultured in B5 liquid medium for 45 days in the dark. Harvested hairy-root lines were used for gene expression and metabolite analysis. Determination of metabolites in hairy roots by HPLC For a time series of metabolite production in O. pumila, hairy roots were harvested every 10 days for 60 days. Hairy roots of transgenic lines, namely, OpWRKY2-OE and OpWRKY2-SRDX, were harvested after 45 days of cultivation. All samples were dried at 50 °C and thoroughly ground, and the liquid medium was directly evaporated. These samples were used for further metabolite measurements. For camptothecin and tryptamine measurements, ~0.1 g of dried hairy-root powder was extracted with 20 mL of methanol and sonicated for 1 h. After centrifugation, the supernatant was evaporated under vacuum, and the residual material was dissolved in 2.0 mL of methanol and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis of camptothecin and tryptamine extracts was performed using an Agilent 1260 detector equipped with a reversed-phase C18 column (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) as previously described5,8. The camptothecin detection conditions were as follows: mobile phase, acetonitrile:water (65:35, v/v); column temperature, 30 °C; and detection wavelength, 254 nm. Tryptamine detection conditions were as follows: mobile phase, 43% acetonitrile:30% methanol:26% double distilled water:1% glacial acetic acid (v/v); column temperature, 30 °C; detection wavelength, 254 nm. Commercially available standards of camptothecin and tryptamine (Aladdin, Shanghai, China) were used for identification and comparative quantification as previously described5,8. For loganin and secologanin measurements, ~0.1 g of dried hairy-root powder was extracted with 10 mL of ethanol:water (4:1, v/v) and sonicated for 30 min. After centrifugation, the supernatant was evaporated under vacuum, and the residual material was dissolved in 2.0 mL of water and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter. HPLC analysis of loganin and secologanin extracts was performed using an Agilent 1260 detector equipped with a reversed-phase C18 column (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) as previously described5,8. The detection conditions of loganin and secologanin were as follows: mobile phase, acetonitrile:water (25:75, v/v); column temperature, 30 °C; and detection wavelength, 236 nm. Commercially available standards of loganin and secologanin (Aladdin, Shanghai, China) were used for comparative quantification as previously described5,8. Recombinant protein production and EMSA To express and purify the recombinant protein, the full-length OpWRKY2 ORF fragment was cloned into the BamH I and Hind III sites of the pCold-TF vector. The constructs were verified by DNA sequencing and transformed into Escherichia coli strain Rosetta (DE3) cells to produce His-tagged fusion proteins. The pCold-TF empty vector without OpWRKY2 was used as the negative control. Transformed Rosetta cell cultures used for the expression of HIS recombinant protein were induced by adding isopropyl β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) at a final concentration of 0.1 mM at an optical density of approximately 0.6 at 600 nm. After induction for 14 h at 16 °C, Rosetta cells were harvested by centrifugation and purified using Ni-NTA (nitrilotriacetic acid) agarose (Invitrogen, USA) as previously described16. To investigate the ability of the OpWRKY2 protein to bind to the W-box in the OpTDC promoter, the 3090 bp upstream region of the OpTDC gene was analyzed. For Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) experiments, DNA probes were designed based on the native OpTDC promoter sequence (−2565 to −2552 relative to the ATG) containing a single W-box. Complementary oligonucleotides labeled with biotin at the 5’ end of each strand were synthesized and annealed to produce double-stranded probes for EMSA. EMSAs were performed as previously described16. Dual-LUC assays To investigate the ability of OpWRKY2 to transcriptionally activate the OpTDC gene, the 3090 bp promoter of OpTDC was analyzed and cloned into the pGreenII0800-LUC vector. The reporter constructs wt-pOpTDC::fLUC and mutant-pOpTDC::fLUC were obtained by inserting the native promoter of OpTDC and a mutated version into the pGreenII0800-LUC vector to drive expression of the firefly luciferase gene30. The Renilla luciferase gene driven by the CaMV 35 S promoter was used as an internal control. The assembled vectors were cotransformed with the helper plasmid pSoup19 into A. tumefaciens strain GV3101. The A. tumefaciens strain GV3101 containing pHB-OpWRKY2-YFP was used as the effector, and pHB-YFP was used as the negative control. Infiltration and detection were performed as previously described, with minor modifications31. The reporter strains harboring wt-pOpTDC::fLUC or mutant-pOpTDC::fLUC were mixed with effector strains harboring either pHB-OpWRKY2-YFP or pHB-YFP at a ratio of 1:1. Leaves were collected after 48 h, and Dual-LUC assays were performed using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Three biological replicates per treatment were measured. All primers used to amplify the OpTDC promoter are listed in Table S2. Y1H assays For Y1H assays, the full-length OpWRKY2 ORF fragment was amplified and cloned into the effector plasmid pB42AD. The triple tandem copy of the pOpTDC wt-W-box motif (CTTCAGTCAAGGCC) and mutant-W-box motif (CTTCAttttAGGCC) were inserted into the reporter plasmid pLacZ between EcoR I and Xho I. Y1H assays were performed as previously described23,32. Effector and reporter plasmids were cotransformed into yeast strain EGY48a. Transformants were cultivated on SD/-Ura/-Trp medium for 48 h and tested on SD/-Ura/-Trp medium with 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β-D-galactopyranoside (X-gal) for 24 h. Empty pB42AD and pLacZ plasmids were cotransformed into yeast and used as negative controls. All primers used to amplify OpWRKY2 and DNA motifs are listed in Table S2. Statistical analyses All experiments in this study were conducted with at least three biological replicates. All data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). To test the statistically significant differences between the control and treated samples/transgenic hairy-root lines, a paired two-tailed Student’s t-test was conducted with a significance threshold of p < 0.05.