4. Methods 4.1. Routine Analysis of Nucleic and Amino Acid Sequences All routine analytic work with nucleic acid and amino acid sequences was performed using Geneious 4.8.5 [70], Mega X [71]; routine amino acid sequence alignments were performed with Clustal Omega (EMBL-EBI) [72]. 4.2. vlgs Search Pipeline To perform the search for van-like genes (named vlgs), all genome assemblies of Actinobacteria—available at the time of work preparation (April 2020) as either full sequences or uncompleted ones—were retrieved from the GenBank database (in few exceptions, genome assemblies were retrieved from RefSeq database), for a total of 7108 assemblies from species belonging to 26 established and 2 tentative orders within the Actinobacteria phylum, represented by 653,111 corresponding nucleic acid sequences. A full list of the genome assemblies and corresponding nucleic acid sequences is given in Supplementary Excel Table S1. The MultiGeneBlast tool [73] was utilized to screen the chosen set of genome assemblies for vlgs. To do that, the chosen set of genome assemblies belonging to each order was downloaded from GenBank (or RefSeq) in a genomic GenBank format (*.gbff). These files were then used to create offline MultiGeneBlast custom databases for each order belonging to the Actinobacteria phylum. MultiGeneBlast was run in a “homology” mode with the default settings, which included 25% minimal sequence coverage of the BLAST hits and 30% minimal amino acid sequence identity of BLAST hits. The maximum distance between genes in locus was increased to 40 kb (considering that vlgs inside a BGC might be separated by some other genes—such as in A47934 BGC [48]). Two input files were used as queries for the MultiGeneBlast search: one included van genes from Str. coelicolor—SCO3589-3590-3594-3595-3596 (vanSRHAX); and the other included balhimycin BGC-situated van genes from Am. balhimycina—DMA12_00360, DMA12_00365 and DMA12_00370 (vanS, vanR and vanY respectively). The first input files allowed to detect vanHAX orthologues co-localized with the vanRS-like regulatory pairs, while the second helped to detect cases when the vanY-like genes were co-localized with vanRS but lacked other van genes in their genetic neighborhood. MultiGeneBlast outputs were then carefully examined, and the amino acid sequences of the proteins coded with the so-identified vlgs were extracted. The information about these vlgs, including the corresponding protein accession numbers, nucleic acid accession numbers and taxa, are summarized in Supplementary Excel Table S2. To refine this initial screening, chosen sets of genomes for each order (highlighted in red in Supplementary Excel Table S2) were manually reexamined for vlgs using BLASTP [74] with SCO3589 (VanS), SCO3590 (VanR), SCO3592 (VanJ), SCO3593 (VanK), SCO3594 (VanH), SCO3595 (VanA), SCO3596 (VanX), CAG25753 (VanY) and ELS50663 (VanZ) as queries. These last sets of genomes were chosen to cover all the genera within a certain order and to include all the genomes carrying known and putative Type I–V GPA BGCs as well as feg-like BGCs. Selected hits were tested for orthology with queries using the Reciprocal Best Hit BLAST approach. Information received here was used to build Figure 2, Figure 3, Figure 4, Figure 5, Figure 6, Figure 7, Figure 8 and Figure 9. 4.3. Search for Putative GPA-like BGCs The MultiGeneBlast tool [73] was used to screen all the genome assemblies for GPA-like BGCs. We utilized the same offline custom databases created for vlgs screening. MultiGeneBlast was also run in “homology” mode with the default settings; however, the maximum distance between genes in one locus was increased to 60 kb. An input file was composed of teicoplanin BGC [75] genes—tei4*, tei8*, tei15*, tei17*, tei23*, tei24*, tei28* and tei29*—coding for an ABC transporter, teicoplanin halogenase, StrR-like transcriptional regulator, prephenate dehydrogenase, l-4-hydroxyphenylglycine biosynthesis enzyme HpgT, type III polyketide synthase DpgA (involved in the biosynthesis of both l-4-hydroxyphenylglycine and l-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine), HmaS and Hmo (l-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine biosynthesis enzymes), respectively. All these genes have their orthologues in BGCs for Type I–V GPAs and in feg. MultiGeneBlast outputs were manually examined and the nucleic acid sequences containing MultiGeneBlast hits were applied for upstream antiSMASH [76] analysis. A list of the obtained putative GPA- and feg-like BGCs is given in Supplementary Excel Table S2. 4.4. Phylogenetic Reconstruction Since the screening revealed hundreds of vlgs, it was difficult to use all the sequences for a comprehensive phylogenetic analysis. Therefore, phylogenies were reconstructed for sets of proteins coded with vlgs from the chosen genomes for each order (highlighted in red in Supplementary Excel Table S2). The final protein datasets for the reconstruction of the phylogenies of the VanY-like carboxypeptidases—VanH; VanA and Ddl; VanX and VanX-like dipeptidases; VanY-like carboxypeptidases, VanX and VanX-like dipeptidases; VanR-like regulators; and VanS-like sensor histidine kinases—are given in Supplementary FASTA Files S1–S7, respectively. Some additional information was coded in the name of each protein sequence to indicate (i) whether this protein is BGC-encoded or not; and (ii) whether this protein is coded with an ‘orphan’ gene or the corresponding gene is co-localized with other vlgs. For instance, “VanYncs-HAXRS_Tt_sp_HY188” indicates that this is VanY-like non-BGC-encoded peptidase, with the corresponding gene co-localized with vanHAXRS, coming from Tomitella sp. HY188. The Mega X [71] package was used to perform the phylogenetic reconstructions. On the road to the representative phylogenetic tree, we always followed the next algorithm. First, multiple amino acid sequence alignments for each dataset were generated using Muscle; the obtained alignments were manually curated to preserve as much meaningful data as possible. Then the curated multiple sequence alignments were analyzed using the Mega X model finder to discover the most appropriate evolutionary models, and the best-scoring models were applied to generate the Maximum Likelihood phylogenies for each protein dataset. A similar approach was used to generate the 16S rRNA gene phylogenetic trees, which can be found in Figure 2, Figure 3, Figure 4 and Figure 5. Final topologies of either the protein or gene trees were derived from 500 bootstraps.