MATERIALS AND METHODS Strains, growth conditions, and reagents. Bacterial strains used in this study are listed in Table S1A in the supplemental material. S. coelicolor strains were grown and maintained by a standard protocol (46). Proper culture media (S. coelicolor in YEME with 5 mM MgCl2, 10% sucrose; E. coli, B. subtilis, and C. glutamicum in LB broth; V. vulnificus in LB with 2.5% NaCl; M. smegmatis in 7H9 medium without ferric ammonium citrate and supplemented with 0.05% Tween 80, 0.2% glucose, 0.5% bovine serum albumin, 0.085% NaCl) were used. For growth of S. coelicolor under anaerobic conditions, S. coelicolor spores were germinated and grown to mid-exponential phase (OD at 600 nm [OD600] of ∼2.0) in YEME medium and then diluted 4-fold into YEME medium that had been placed in an anaerobic chamber (Coy) after being autoclaved overnight, followed by cultivation at 30°C under hypoxic condition. List of strains, plasmids, and primers used in this study. (A) Strains and plasmids. AmR, apramycin resistant. (B) Primers. F and R refer to the forward and reverse of the coding region, respectively; UP and DW refer to the upstream and downstream of the flanking regions for each gene, respectively. Download Table S1, PDF file, 0.07 MB. For antibiotic treatment, freshly made solutions of antibiotics (kanamycin disulfate salt, tetracycline hydrochloride, chloramphenicol, erythromycin A dihydrate, fusidic acid sodium salt, polymyxin B sulfate, novobiocin sodium salt, rifampin; all from Sigma) at the indicated concentrations were applied to the early exponential-phase cells (OD600 of ∼0.3). SOD activity staining. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity staining was conducted as described previously with slight modification (47). Cell lysates (20 μg) from wild-type S. coelicolor were separated on a 10% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel. The gel was washed with distilled water and soaked in 20 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.8) containing 30 μM riboflavin and 30 mM tetramethylethylenediamine for 30 min in the dark. The gel was transferred to 20 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.8) containing 2.5 mM nitroblue tetrazolium for 20 min in the dark. The gel was illuminated with white light until an SOD activity band appeared. Gene deletion and overexpression. Streptomyces coelicolor deletion mutants were constructed by homologous recombination. In brief, flanking regions (upstream and downstream; up to ∼1 kb) of the gene were amplified by PCR and cloned into pKC1139 digested with BamHI/HindIII using Gibson assembly. Sequence-verified clones were introduced into nonmethylating E. coli ET12567/pUZ8002 and transmitted into S. coelicolor via conjugation. Single-crossover strains were selected with 50 μg/mL apramycin, and double crossover was induced through liquid culture at 38°C. Single-colony isolation was conducted through serial dilution spreading on an NA (nutrient agar) plate. Deletion mutants were selected by sensitivity to 50 μg/mL apramycin and confirmed by PCR. For overexpression of the target genes, the ermE* promoter from pMF23 was fused to each target gene cloned into pSET152 digested with BamHI/EcoRV using Gibson assembly. Sequence-verified clones were introduced into S. coelicolor via conjugation with E. coli ET12567/pUZ8002 and selected by resistance to 50 μg/mL apramycin. Plasmids and primers used in this study are listed in Table S1A and B. Disk diffusion assay. For the disk diffusion assay, 1 × 108 spores of wild-type S. coelicolor were overlaid on fresh NA plates. After air drying, 8-mm paper disks (Advantec) were put on the plate. Then, 20 μL of kanamycin (25 μg) and/or FeCl3 (15 μg) was dropped on the disk. After incubation at 30°C for 48 h, an inhibition zone was observed. Antibiotic sensitivity assay. To enumerate antibiotic sensitivity, relative growth (%) and number of CFU (CFU/mL) were determined. Antibiotic and iron treatments were done at various concentrations using the early exponential-phase cells. After 8 h (for S. coelicolor) or 16 h (for M. smegmatis) of treatment, relative growth (%) was calculated by determining the ratio of the OD600 value of the culture to that of the nontreated control. Along with OD600 measurements, aliquots from cultures were subjected to viable counts on NA plates. CFU/mL were enumerated after 48 h of incubation. Intracellular iron quantification. Intracellular iron quantification was conducted as described previously (48) with slight modification. Briefly, the cells were lysed by ice-cold phosphate buffer saline using sonication. Cell lysate (100 μL) was mixed with 100 μL of 10 mM HCl and an iron-releasing solution (2.25% [wt/vol] KMnO4, 0.7 M HCl), incubated at 60°C for 2 h, and then subjected to cooling to room temperature, followed by the addition of 30 μL of an iron-releasing solution (6.5 mM ferrozine, 6.5 mM neocuproine, 2.5 M ammonium acetate, 1 M ascorbic acid). After 30 min of incubation, OD550 values were measured and converted to intracellular iron levels based on the standard curve. Determining MIC and MLC. An MIC assay was conducted as described previously (49) with slight modification. Early exponential-phase cells were diluted 1:10 with fresh medium, 200 μL of which was dispensed into a 96-well plate with 2-fold serially diluted antibiotics, with or without 250 μM FeCl3. After 12 h of incubation (for S. coelicolor) or 36 h of incubation (for M. smegmatis), 30 μL of 0.03% resazurin solution was added to each well. After an additional 3 h of incubation at 30°C for color change, the lowest concentrations with no color change (i.e., blue color remained unchanged) were scored as the MIC values. The minimum lethal concentration (MLC) was determined by directly plating the content (10 μL) of the wells at concentrations higher than the MIC value. After 48 h of incubation, the lowest concentrations with no colony formation were determined as the MLC values. Translation rate measurement. S. coelicolor cells at the early exponential phase (OD600 of ∼0.3) were treated with kanamycin and iron for 30 min, followed by treatment with EasyTag l-[35S]methionine (1 μCi) (PerkinElmer) at 30°C for 10 min. The incorporation reaction was quenched by adding methionine (0.5 mg) and the same volume of cold trichloroacetic acid (TCA) solution (30%) with vortexing every 10 min for 30 min. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 10,000 × g at 4°C for 5 min and washed twice with ice-cold acetone. After air drying of residual acetone, resuspended pellets were dot blotted on Whatman filter paper. Phosphor signal was imaged using BAS-2500 (Fujifilm). The radioactivity of the blots was quantified from radiographs using MultiGauge v3.0 (Fujifilm). RNA-seq and analysis. S. coelicolor cells at the early exponential phase (OD600 of ∼0.3) were treated with kanamycin and/or iron for 30 min and harvested. The harvested cell pellets were washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and subjected to RNA extraction using SDS and a hot-phenol protocol (46), followed by DNase I treatment (Invitrogen). rRNA was depleted using a Ribo-Zero rRNA removal kit (Epicentre, USA), and the libraries for Illumina sequencing were made with the TruSeq stranded total RNA (NEB Microbe, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed using the Illumina NovaSeq platform by paired-end 100-bp sequencing. Raw sequencing data were analyzed using the Galaxy platform (https://usegalaxy.org) (50). Briefly, after a quality check using FastQC v0.11.4 and adapter sequence trimming using Trimmomatic v0.38, the reads were mapped to the S. coelicolor A3(2) genome (NC_003888.3) using HISAT2 v2.1.0. Total mapped reads were separated by strand specificity using bamSplit v2.4.0 and sam_merge2 v1.2.0. Strand-specific mapping data were counted using featurecounts v1.6.4. Normalized expression data were analyzed using the DESeq2 package in R for identification of differential expressed genes (DEGs). Functional enrichment of DEGs was conducted using Gene Ontology Resource (http://geneontology.org) (51) and Panther (52) using locus tag and UniProt entry. A heat map and dot plot were illustrated using gplots and ggplot2 package in R. NAD/NADH quantification. For quantification of the oxidized form (NAD+) and the reduced form (NADH), a PicoSens NAD/NADH assay kit (Biomax) was used according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. Harvested cells were disrupted by extraction buffer using sonication, and cell debris was centrifuged at 20,000 × g at 4°C for 10 min. Proteins in the cell lysate were depleted by using a 10-kDa centrifugal filter (Merck). One half of the cell lysate and the other half that had been incubated at 60°C for 30 min to deplete NAD+ were used to determine the quantity of the total (i.e., both NAD+ and NADH) NAD and that of NADH, respectively. Each sample was treated with cycling enzymes for 5 min and mixed with a colorimetric probe. After incubation for 1.5 h, the OD450 was measured for the NAD/NADH quantity normalized by dry cell weight to calculate the ratio of NAD+ and NADH. ATP quantification. The ATP level was quantified using the BacTiter-Glo microbial cell viability assay (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After treatment with kanamycin and/or iron for 30 min, 100 μL of culture medium was mixed with an equal volume of BacTiter-Glo reagent on a 96-well plate. After reaction for 5 min at room temperature, the luminescence of each well was recorded to determine the level of ATP based on the standard curve. Data availability. RNA-seq data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession number GSE168567.