Materials and methods Fruit and plants The wolfberry fruit was purchased from Ningxia, Gansu. Fully ripe fruits of the same size and without any mechanical damage were sterilized with 1% sodium hypochlorite, rinsed three times with sterile distilled water (SDW), and air-dried naturally on an ultra-clean bench. Lonicera maackii (Rupr.) Maxim is from Lanzhou Botanical Garden, Gansu, China. Picked stems and leaves were stored in airtight bags and kept at 4°C for later use. Culture media and microorganisms Tianqi Gene Biotechnology Co., Ltd. provided Luria–Bertani medium (LB) and potato dextrose agar medium (PDA; Lanzhuo, China). Agar was purchased from Niuniu Biochemical Co., Ltd. (Lanzhuo, China). Wolfberry fungal pathogen A. iridiaustralis LB7 (MN 944921) was supplied by the College of Life Sciences, Northwest Normal University, China’s Plant-Microbe Interactions Research Lab. This pathogen has been demonstrated to significantly worsen postharvest wolfberry deterioration in our previous study (Ling et al., 2021). A. iridiaustralis was inoculated on PDA at 28°C for 7 days, the fungal spores were resuspended in SDW, and the concentration of the spore suspension was adjusted to 1 × 105 spores/mL with a hemocytometer. Pathogenic fungi Phytophthora capsici (ACCC 37132), Colletotrichum capsici (ACCC 36946), F. oxysporum (ACCC 39326), B. cinerea (ACCC 37347), Rhizoctonia solani (ACCC 38870), F. graminearum (ACCC 39334) were obtained from Agricultural Culture Collection of China, Beijing. F. annulatum (MT 434004), Talaromyces tumuli (MT 434003), Colletotrichum fioriniae (MN 944922), and F. arcuatisporum (MN 944920) were isolated from disease plants and all pathogenic strains were stored in the laboratory (Ling et al., 2021). Isolation, screening and identification of a highly antifungal bacterial endophyte Using our previous technique, we isolated and characterized endophytic bacteria from L. maackii (Rupr.) Maxim (Ling et al., 2019). Briefly, the fresh stems and leaves stored in the refrigerator were removed, rinsed under running water, air-dried naturally, sterilized, and rinsed three times with sterile water. Next, the stems and leaves were cut using a sterile scalpel and cultured in solid LB medium plates at 37°C. Each colony was transferred to new medium until a pure culture of the strain is obtained. Using the two sealed base plate approach, the strain with the greatest capacity to suppress the pathogenic fungus was selected for further investigation. In general, 80 μl of bacterial suspension was evenly distributed on LB solid medium. Subsequently, a 6 mm-diameter fungal disk was cut and placed in the center of a sterile PDA petri dish. The two plates were sealed to prevent the loss of VOCs. The bacteriostatic ability of endophytic bacteria against pathogenic fungi was evaluated on the basis of the diameter of the fungus. The bacterial DNA template obtained by screening was extracted using of the bacterial genome extraction kit (Huada Gene Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China). The 16S rDNA fragment was amplified through PCR by using universal primers 27F (5′AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG3′) and 1429R (5′GGTTACCTTGTTACGACTT3′). The cycle parameters were as follows: predenaturation at 96°C for 5 min, followed by 30 cycles of denaturation at 96°C for 30 s, annealing at 62°C for 30 s, and a final extension at 72°C for 30 s. The extension was performed at 72°C for 10 min at the end of the cycle. PCR products were detected through 1% agarose gel electrophoresis and sequenced. The sequencing results of 16S rDNA were input into the nucleic acid database alignment system of the National Center for Biological Information (NCBI) website, and nucleic acid sequence alignment analysis was performed using the Blast program. A Phylogenetic tree was constructed using the neighbor-joining method with MEGA-X software to analyze the phylogenetic relationship. In vitro inhibitory activity of VOCs from Bacillus Velezensis L1 Inhibitory activity of VOCs with different inoculation concentrations of Bacillus Velezensis L1 A dual culture method was used to evaluate the inhibitory effect of antagonistic bacteria produced VOCs on A. iridiaustralis mycelial growth and conidial germination (Ye et al., 2020; Di Francesco et al., 2020b). SDW was used to inoculate the control plates with the same amounts of bacteria as the test plates, which was 80 μl of bacterial suspension at a concentration of 106–109 colony forming units (CFU)/ml. The plate cover was then changed out by a PDA plate that had been injected with a 6 mm-diameter disk or 20 μl of A. iridiaustralis spore suspension. Both plates were immediately sealed with parafilm, and cultured for 7 days at 28°C. Each experiment was conducted three times. Effect of VOCs from Bacillus velezensis L1 on the spore germination and sporulation capacity of Alternaria iridiaustralis With a few minor adjustments, the preceding approach was used to measure spore germination and sporulation capacity (Bu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021b). LB plates were inoculated with strain L1 and PDA plates were covered with a fungal spore suspension (1 × 105 spores/mL), as indicated earlier. After 12 h incubation at 28°C, spore germination could be visualized under a light microscope. The sporulation capacity experiment was conducted according to instructions provided in Section 2.4.1. In general, a 6 mm fungal plug was removed from the cultivated PDA medium and vortexed in SDW. A hemocytometer was used to count the spores. Effect of VOC prefumigation on mycelium growth The LB plate coated with the 80 μl bacterial suspension and the PDA plate containing a 6 mm-diameter disk were snap-sealed. After 4 or 5 days of fumigation in the incubator, 6 mm-diameter disks were cut from the PDA plate by using a punching bear, transferred to a new PDA plate, and incubated at 28°C for 7 days. Then, mycelial growth of pathogenic fungi were measured. Scanning electron microscopy analysis The effect of VOCs produced by B. velezensis L1 on pathogenic fungi was observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). SEM analysis was performed as described previously (Wonglom et al., 2020). In vivo biocontrol of Alternaria iridiaustralis on wolfberry fruit by VOCs from Bacillus velezensis L1 Inhibitory effects of VOCs on Alternaria iridiaustralis in vivo The biocontrol effects of different initial amounts of VOCs in vivo were investigated using different numbers of plates. LB plates were treated with 80 μl bacterial suspension (1 × 108 CFU/ml), and these uncovered plates were then placed at the bottom of sterile glass containers in numbers of 2, 4, 6, and 8, respectively. Then, 5 μl of A. iridiaustralis spore suspension was inoculated into wolfberry fruits. After inoculation, the fruits were placed in sterile petri dishes and placed on top of glass containers. The container was sealed and incubated at room temperature for 7 days. The decay incidence and disease index of the wolfberry fruits were measured using previous methods (Xu et al., 2016). Effect of VOCs on wolfberry fruit postharvest natural decay Untreated wolfberry fruits were treated with different numbers of LB plates, and after fumigation for 7 days at room temperature, the decay incidence and disease index were measured. Identification of VOCs The method used for identifying VOC components of B. velezensis L1 is consistent with that described in our previous study (Ling et al., 2021). Then, 10 μl of the bacterial suspension of strain L1 was inoculated into a 20-mL headspace vial containing 5 ml of solid LB medium. The solid LB medium without the strain was used as a blank control, and each sample was repeated three times. After incubating the vials for 3 days in a 37°C incubator, the headspace-gas chromatography-ion mobility spectrometry (HS-GC-IMS) assay was performed. VOCs were collected and sent to the G.A.S. Department of Shandong HaiNeng Science Instrument Co., Ltd. (Shandong, China) for measurement using the HS-GC-IMS instrument (FlavourSpec®). The sample was incubated at 40°C for 15 min, and VOCs from the 500 μL headspace were injected into the testing instrument using a heated syringe (85°C). GC equipped with the MXT-5 column (15 m, ID: 0.53 mm df: 1 μm) was used for chromatographic separation at 60°C. Pure nitrogen (99.999% purity) was used as the carrier gas. The flow of drift gas (nitrogen) of the IMS was set to 150 ml/min, and a 9.8 cm drift tube was operated at a constant voltage at 45°C. The program was as follows: 2 ml/min for 2 min, 10 ml/min for 10 min, and 100 ml/min for 20 min. Data were acquired and processed using instrumental analysis software such as VOCal and Reporter, Gallery plot, Dynamic PCA, and GC × IMS Library. The GC-IMS Library Search software uses the National Institute of Standards and Technology database and IMS database for qualitative analysis of the components. In vitro responses of Alternaria iridiaustralis to a single component of VOC The pathogenic fungus A. iridiaustralis was grown on PDA medium at 28°C for 7 days. Using a punching bear, a 6 mm-diameter disks were removed from the PDA plate’s edge and placed one by one in the center of each fresh petri plate. A sterile filter paper (diameter: 6 mm) was placed in the center of the petri dish lid. Then, equal volumes of each individual pure VOC (Table 1) were added to increase the air concentration from 20 μl/L to 100 μl/L. An identical volume of SDW was used for the control. A Vernier caliper was used to measure the plug diameter before the petri dishes were sealed and grown for 4 days at 28°C. Pure components comprising the VOCs of Bacillus velezensis L1, these substances were purchased for further experiments. Compound CAS Source Purity. 2,3-butanedione C431038 Macklin ≥99.0%. 1-Hydroxy-2-propanone C116096 Macklin ≥95.0%. Acetoin C513860 Macklin ≥97.0%. 2-pentanone C107879 Macklin ≥99.0%. 2-heptanone C110430 Macklin ≥99.7%. Cyclohexanone C108941 Macklin ≥99.0%. methyl 2-methylbutanoate C868575 Macklin ≥98.0%. 2-Pentylfuran C3777693 Macklin ≥98.0%. 2-methylpropyl butanoate C539902 Macklin ≥98.0%. In vivo control of Alternaria iridiaustralis on wolfberry fruit by pure synthetic components of VOCs A single VOC component was chosen for additional testing in vivo based on the outcomes of in vitro testing. Fruits were infected and placed in a sterile petri plate. Then, the decay incidence and disease index of wolfberry fruit was determined with various quantities of pure components. Broad antagonistic activity of strain L1 We determined whether strain L1 has broad-spectrum antifungal activity against other significant fungal infections. Twelve pathogens were used in our test, namely P. capsici, C. capsici, F. oxysporum, B. cinerea, R. solani, F. graminearum, F. annulatum, T. tumuli, C. fioriniae and F. arcuatisporum. The following formula was used to compute the percentage of mycelial growth inhibition: Inhibition rate (%) = [(dc − dt)/dc] × 100 Where the terms dc (cm) represent the average colony diameters of the control and treatment groups, respectively. Statistical analysis SPSS 20.0 software was used to perform statistical analyses. Followed by the Duncan’s test, p < 0.05 was set to indicate a statistically significant difference. Drawn with the Origin 9.0 software, by measuring three independent replicates, all data were reported as the mean ± standard error.