Materials and Methods Culture Media E. coli cells were grown in L broth (1% polypeptone, 0.5% yeast extract, 0.5% NaCl and 0.1% glucose, pH 7.2) or M9 minimal medium (6.8 g/L Na2HPO4, 3.0 g/L KH2PO4, 0.5 g/L NaCl, 1.0 g/L NH4Cl, 2 mM MgSO4, 0.1 mM CaCl2 and 4 g/L glucose). For agar plates, 1.5% agar was added to the medium. For culturing the ALA auxotrophic MGHA01, 50 μg/mL ALA was included. For culturing plasmid-containing strains, 50 μg/mL ampicillin or 20 μg/mL kanamycin was added. Draft Genome Sequencing The genomic DNA of the alaremycin-producing strain, Streptomyces sp. A012304, was extracted using the phenol–chloroform extraction method. Draft genome sequencing was performed by Hokkaido System Science Co., Ltd. using Illumina Hiseq with the Paired-End method. De novo assembly was performed using the assembly programme, Velvet (Zerbino and Birney 2008). ORF prediction was performed using the programme GetORF constituted in Jemboss. Plasmid Construction Plasmids for complementation tests and HPLC analysis were constructed by ligating DNA fragments containing each gene with pTrc99A in which the trc promoter induces overexpression of cloned genes when isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) is added to the culture media. DNA fragments from Streptomyces sp. A012304 were polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplified using genomic DNA as a template. DNA fragments containing reconstructed ancestral genes were excised from the plasmids prepared by Eurofins. Plasmids for His-tagged enzyme overproduction were constructed using the pET28b(+) vector. Ligated DNA fragments containing the AlmA and RcALAS genes were PCR amplified using genomic DNA of A012304 or Rhodobacter capsulatus as a template, respectively, and all other fragments were PCR amplified using pTrc99A-based plasmids as a template. All purified proteins were designed to be fused with a His-tag at the N-terminus. Site-directed mutagenesis was performed by overlapping PCR (Ho et al. 1989) using point-substituted primer sets. Upstream and downstream sequences from the mutated site were PCR amplified with a 20–30 nt overlap, respectively, then the amplified DNA fragments were mixed and subjected to second round PCR. pT-almA was used for the PCR-template to construct single substituted almA, and pT-almA-S82T was used for the PCR-template to construct the double substituted, almA. The primer sets for PCR and restriction sites for cloning are shown in supplementary Table S2, Supplementary Material online. All plasmid insertions were confirmed by sequencing. All constructed plasmids were introduced into E. coli JM109 by electroporation. Plasmids were purified using a FastGene Plasmid Mini Kit (NIPPON Genetics). Complementation Test The E. coli ΔhemA mutant strain, MGHA01, was constructed by P1 phage-mediated transduction using a wild-type K-12 strain MG1655 as a recipient and an hemA::KmR mutant FN102 (Fukai et al. 2003) as a donor. Plasmids for the complementation assay were introduced into MGHA01 using electroporation. A complementation test was performed by streaking overnight cultures of transformants, which were grown on L broth. For complementation tests on M9 media, overnight cultures grown on L broth were washed with saline. Serial dilutions of the cell suspension were spotted onto an M9 agar plate. Then, 1 mM IPTG was added for gene induction. Each plate was incubated at 37°C overnight for the L plate or 48 h for the M9 plate, and the resulting growth of the transformants was monitored. Extraction of Alaremycin, HPLC and MS Analysis The E. coli strain JM109 carrying plasmids expressing the almA, almAB, almABC or almABCE genes were cultivated in M9 medium at 30°C for 4 days. Gene expression was induced by adding 1 mM IPTG at 0.3–0.5 OD660. Cells were removed via centrifugation and the supernatants of the culture medium were collected. The supernatant was extracted by repeated solvent dissolution with ethyl acetate/water (1:1, v/v) at pH 2, 9 and 2. The resultant organic phase was evaporated to remove solvent and the extract was resolved in acetonitrile. Samples were then subjected to HPLC analysis using a Prominence system (Shimadzu) equipped with a COSMOSIL HILIC packed column (nacalai tesque). The separation was done with a mobile phase of acetonitrile/30 mM ammonium acetate (4:1, v/v) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Alaremycin was detected by absorption at 253 nm. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using electrospray time-of-flight mass spectrometry (ESI-TOF-MS) using a micrOTOF II (Bruker). For sample preparation, the HPLC fraction around 7.9 min was collected and extracted with ethyl acetate, pH 2, and the resulting organic phase was evaporated. ESI-TOF-MS was performed in positive mode. Protein Purification The E. coli strain BL21(DE3), carrying a plasmid expressing the protein of interest, was grown in 100 or 150 ml of L broth at 30°C for 2 h. Then, 0.5 mM IPTG was added and the culture was continued for another 22 h at 20°C. The cells were collected by centrifugation and then lysed by sonication in 300 mM KCl, 50 mM KH2PO4 and 5 mM imidazole. The lysates were centrifuged at 15,300 g for 20 min to remove insoluble materials. His-tagged proteins were purified using the Profinia system (Bio-Rad). His-tagged proteins were eluted with 300 mM KCl, 50 mM KH2PO4 and 250 mM imidazole. Eluted fractions were desalted with 20 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5. The protein concentrations were determined by a Bradford protein assay kit and the protein solutions were adjusted to 10 μM with 20 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5, 20 μM PLP and 10% glycerol. The purified proteins were stored at −30°C. The purity of the proteins was confirmed by sodium dodecyl sulphate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Enzymatic Assay The ALA synthesis activity assay was performed using the spectrophotometric method reported by Hunter and Ferreira (1995) with minor modifications. The reaction solution was 20 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5, containing 20 μM PLP, 3 mM MgCl2, 250 μM thiamine pyrophosphate, 1 mM α-ketoglutarate, 1 mM nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+), 0.25 U/ml α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (Sigma), amino acid substrate, succinyl-CoA and purified protein. In this assay, free CoA is simultaneously released with ALA or intermediate I of alaremycin production. Free CoA and NAD+ are then converted to succinyl-CoA and NADH by α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, and the NADH concentration is determined by its specific absorption at 340 nm. The amino acids tested included glycine, serine, alanine and threonine. The reactions were performed at 37°C and the absorbance was measured by a spectrophotometer (NanoDrop 2000, Thermo). The molar extinction coefficient of NADH is 6560 M−1cm−1. Reaction mixtures without amino acids were used as controls. For kinetic parameter determination, the reaction time was fixed at 60 min. Enzyme concentrations were adjusted according to their activity levels to maintain a surplus supply of succinyl-CoA by α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase: 0.01 μM AlmA for serine, 0.1 μM ancAlmA for serine, 0.05 μM CA for serine, 0.05 μM. RcALAS for glycine and all others were 2 μM. Kinetic parameters were determined by nonlinear regression fitting using GraphPad Prizm9. Homology Modeling and Site-Directed Mutagenesis The 3D homology modeling of AlmA was done by SWISS-MODEL (Waterhouse et al. 2018) using the RcALAS 3D structure (PDB id: 2BWP) as a template. Amino acid sequences were aligned by ClustalW. The 3D structures were treated using UCSF Chimera to create images or to calculate atomic distance. Sequence Data Collection Amino acid sequences used for phylogenetic analysis were collected from the NCBI RefSeq database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/refseq/), which comprised non-redundant sequences, to avoid strain level redundancies. cALAS sequences used in fig. 2A were selected from bacterial species, known as producers of antibiotics containing a C5N unit and previously discussed in phylogenetic analysis by Petříčková et al. (2015). ALAS sequences used in fig. 5A were obtained using its EC number “2.3.1.37” as a query and filtering only α-proteobacterial proteins. To avoid complex calculations, similar sequences indicated by a neighbour joining tree were removed, and finally, 31 ALAS sequences were selected. AlmA homologue sequences were obtained by BLAST search using the AlmA sequence as a query. Very similar sequences were also removed, and 30 AlmA homologous sequences were selected. Three cALAS sequences were selected as an out-group. Data collection was performed from July to August 2020. Phylogenetic Tree Construction Selected sequences for phylogenetic tree construction were aligned by ClustalW. The amino acid based phylogenetic trees were constructed by Bayesian inference using MrBayes 3.2.7 (Ronquist et al. 2012). The adopted evolutionary model was gamma distribution and the amino acid substitutional model was WAG (Whelan and Goldman 2001). The Markov chain Monte Carlo runs were performed for 0.4 million generations for the tree shown in fig. 2A and 2 million generations for the tree in fig. 5A, with sampling at every 500 generations. After deletion of one-fourth burn-in, consensual topologies were computed from sampled trees. Trees were depicted using FigTree software. ASR ASR was performed using PAML software (phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood) 4.9j (Yang 2007). The adopted evolutionary model was gamma distribution, and the amino acid substitutional model was WAG. Reconstructed sequences were aligned, and extra sequences, which were not conserved in most of the extant sequences, were removed. The codons of the reconstructed amino acid sequences were optimized for E. coli. The whole nucleotide sequences were artificially synthesized by Eurofins and the sequences subcloned into the pEX-K4J2 vector. These plasmids were introduced into E. coli JM109 using electroporation.