Result Relationship between leftover feed in lactating sow cribs and housefly-carried microbiota Lactating leftover feed at NFB without residual removal treatment was exposed to microbes from the environment and experienced more than 9 h of spontaneous fermentation. The alpha diversity analysis showed that the Shannon index experienced volatility from 30 min to 8 h after the end of feeding, while observed OTU continued to rise in number, but none of the adjacent time spots showed significant differences (Supplementary Table 1). LefSe analysis based on genus level demonstrated dominant bacteria at 30-minute, 2-hour and 4-hour of lactating leftover respectively, suggesting that the microbial composition of residual feed for lactating sows changed over time (Supplementary Fig. 1). Meanwhile, the top ten relative abundance features at genus level in the residual feed on average include Weissella (∼ 42.73%), Lactobacillus (∼ 19.40%), Leuconostoc (∼ 10.65%), Pediococcus (∼ 2.66%), Neoasaia (∼ 2.59%), Chishuiella (∼ 2.28%), Lactococcus (∼ 2.27%), Corynebacterium (∼ 1.95%), Arthrobacter (∼ 1.81%) and Empedobacter (∼ 1.70%) (Fig. 1B). Considering the non-negligible bidirectional microbial transfer between houseflies and lactating sow residual feed, we hypothesized that microorganisms carried by houseflies present in the NFB are associated with lactating sow residual feed. Therefore, we evaluated the contribution of lactating sow residual feed to microorganisms carried by houseflies with SourceTracker. The results showed that the lactating sow residual feed provided ∼ 23.32% of microbiota to houseflies located in the NFB, while the removal of lactating sow residual feed significantly reduced the contribution to houseflies from the lactating sow feed (p = 0.021). (Fig. 1C). Meanwhile, the average microbial contribution of the lactating sow residual feed fluctuated over time, with the lowest contribution (∼ 3.49%) at the 30-minute time spot and the highest contribution (5.81%) at the 2-hour time spot (Fig. 1B). We used PCoA and ANOSIM with unweighted UniFrac distance to compare the differences in microbial structure carried by houseflies located in NFB and RFB (Fig. 1D). ANOSIM analysis showed that the presence of lactating sow residual feed influenced the microbial structure of houseflies, but did not yet reach a statistically significant difference (R = 0.031, p = 0.053). Implication of houseflies in the change of farrowing barn environmental microbiota We compared microbial component in the gestating sow accessible environmental regions including gestating cribs, handrail and skin between NFB and RFB (Fig. 2A). ANOSIM analyses showed that removal of leftover feed in lactating sow cribs caused significant differences on gestating sow crib surface microbiota (R = 0.332, p = 0.047), gestating sow handrail surface microbiota (R = 0.435, p = 0.009), as well as gestating sow skin microbiota (R = 0.267, p = 0.004). SourceTracker analysis showed that houseflies located in the NFB contributed ∼ 4.97% of microbiota to gestating sow cribs, ∼ 4.67% of microbiota to handrail and ∼ 7.38% of microbiota to gestating sow skin on average, while removal of lactating leftover significantly reduced all the contribution (p = 0.004) (Fig. 2B). We performed LefSe analyses at both ASV and genus level of housefly as well as gestating sow crib, handrail and skin microbiota located at the NFB with their counterparts sampled at the RFB to screen for common dominant features between houseflies and different environmental regions with the presence of leftover feed for lactating sows. At the ASV level, there were 50 dominant target features present in houseflies located at the NFB, of which 43 were found to be present in the lactating sow residual feed. 17 of 43 features were dominant in at least one environmental region located in the NFB and 5 features were dominant in at least two environmental regions located in the NFB, including Feature 7 (Leuconostoc citreum), Feature 3 (Weissella paramesenteroides), Feature 66 (Lactobacillus amylotrophicus), Feature 21 (Leuconostoc) and Feature20 (Pediococcus). Among them, Feature 7 (Leuconostoc citreum) was dominant in the three environmental regions of NFB (Fig. 2C). At the genus level, there were 30 dominant genera present in houseflies located at the NFB, of which 26 were found to be present in the lactating sow residual feed. 7 of 26 genera were dominant in at least one environmental region located in the NFB, and 3 genera were dominant in at least two environmental regions located in the NFB, including Leuconostoc, Weissella and Pediococcus. Among them, Leuconostoc was dominant in all three environmental regions of NFB (Fig. 2D). Fecal microbiota of gestating sow in different groups Sow fecal microbiota in three groups was dominated by Firmicutes (∼ 87.51%), followed by Bacteroidota (∼ 5.07%), Spirochaetota (∼ 4.31%), Proteobacteria (∼ 1.92%) and Cyanobacteria (∼ 0.30%) in descending order by average relative abundance at the phylum level (Fig. 3A). Firmicutes (p = 0.025) and Actinobacteriota (p = 0.015) were significantly lower and Cyanobacteria (p = 0.003) were significantly higher in the feces of gestating sows located in NFB compared to those located in BB, whereas in the feces of gestating sows located in RFB Spirochaetota (p = 0.041) and Cyanobacteria (p = 0.001) were significantly increased (Fig. 3B). At the phylum level, there was no significant difference in the relative abundance of fecal microbiota between gestating sows located in NFB and RFB. Analysis of alpha diversity showed that fecal microorganisms of gestating sows located in both NFB (p = 0.008) and RFB (p = 0.016) were significantly higher in Shannon’s index than those located in BB (Supplementary Table 2). Meanwhile, fecal microbiota of gestating sows located in NFB and RFB had higher number of observed OTU compared to gestating sows located in BB on average, but only gestating sows located in NFB were significantly higher (p = 0.040). In addition, there was no significant difference in alpha diversity between fecal microbiota of gestating sows located at NFB and RFB (Supplementary Table 2). PCoA and ANOSIM based on unweighted UniFrac distance showed significant differences in fecal microorganisms in all three groups of gestating sows in both comparisons (BB versus NFB, p = 0.018; NFB versus RFB, p = 0.013; BB vs. RFB, p = 0.001) (Fig. 3C). LefSe analysis based on genus level showed that gestating sows located in NFB with the presence of lactating sow leftovers have significant higher Weissella (NFB versus BB, p = 0.009; NFB versus RFB, p = 0.017) and RF39 (NFB versus BB, p = 0.011; NFB versus RFB, p = 0.028) in fecal bacteria compared to gestating sows located in BB as well as RFB after removal of residuals, while gestating sows in RFB and BS both upregulated the proportion of Clostridium sensu stricto 3 (BB versus NFB, p = 0.032; RFB versus NFB, p = 0.003) and Anaerocolumna (BB versus NFB, p = 0.034; RFB versus NFB, p = 0.016) (Supplementary Figs. 2,3). LefSe analysis based on ASV levels provided analogous results (Supplementary Figs. 4, 5), with removal of residual treatments causing significant decreases in 15 features including Feature 1 (Weissella, NFB versus BB, p = 0.009; NFB versus RFB, p = 0.017) in gestating sow feces, 12 of which were consistent with feces LefSe results of BB versus NFB, and restored 4 features relative abundance in the RFB which are also dominate in the BB comparing to NFB (Supplementary Table 3). SourceTracker analysis showed that gestating sow cribs, handrails and skins at the NFB collectively provided ∼ 1.14% of microbiota for gestating sow fecal bacteria comparing to ∼ 1.05% at the RFB on average, which did not result in a significant difference (Fig. 3D). Comparing the different environmental regions separately, the contribution of microorganisms was significantly higher in the crib in the NFB than in the RFB (p = 0.023), whereas the remaining environmental regions did not show significant changes before and after removal of lactating sow residuals (Fig. 3D). Microbial transmission derived from lactating sow leftover We evaluated each bacterial microorganism as individual microbial transmission pathway along different kinds of sample targets (housefly, gestating sow crib, handrail, skin and gestating sow feces) at the NFB and RFB and used an exponential function summation to accrue differences in relative abundance. We used 3.903 as a probability screening threshold (exponential value of 0.05 for the equivalent 3 groups) and 8 as a multiplicative difference screening threshold (mean 2-fold for the equivalent 3 groups) for screening. At the ASV level, we screened 27 eligible dominant features located in the NFB from 5852 features, of which half of 10 samples with the lowest probability index were top 10 relative abundance features in the residual feed of lactating sows including Feature 21 (Leuconostoc), Feature 1 (Weissella), Feature 7 (Leuconostoc citreum), Feature 12 (Lactobacillus brevis) and Feature 20 (Pediococcus) (Fig. 3E). At the genus level, we screened 10 eligible dominant genera located in the NFB from 627 genera, half of 10 genera were also the top 10 genera in terms of relative abundance in lactating sow residual feed, including Weissella, Leuconostoc, Lactobacillus, Pediococcus and Lactococcus (Fig. 3F). We analyzed the correlation between the transmission possibility of target bacteria exceeding the threshold and their relative abundance in the residual feed of lactating sows. Spearman correlation coefficients showed that the correlation between exponential summation of the genus level target bacteria probability index and their residual abundance increased over time, with a coefficient of 0.750 for 30-minute and 2-hour time spots and the coefficient increased to 0.770 at 4 and 6-hour as well as at 8-hour time spots. Based on the level of the ASV correlation analysis suggested that the highest correlation coefficient of 0.370 was found at 8-hour time spot. To validate the hypothesized microbial transmission chain, we screened for the bacteria present in the lactating sow residual feed whose average relative abundance share synchronous decline in at least one environmental region (gestating sow crib, handrail or skin) and in both housefly and lactating sow feces in the RFB comparing to the NFB. We hypothesized that these bacteria come from the leftover of lactating sows and spread to different farrowing barn environmental regions with the help of houseflies, ultimately affecting the fecal microbiota of gestating sows. At the ASV level, Feature 1 (Weissella), Feature 4 (Terrisporobacter), Feature 5 (Peptostreptococcaceae), Feature 25 (Streptococcus), Feature 39 (Weissella) and Feature 40 (Terrisporobacter) shared synchronous decline both in housefly-skin-sow feces and housefly-handrail-sow feces samples. Target features in housefly-crib-sow samples were similar except that feature 40 was replaced by feature 22 (Escherichia-Shigella) (Supplementary Table 4). At the genus level, nine genera from lactating leftover including Weissella, Streptococcus, RF39, Cellulosilyticum, UCG-002, UCG-005, Terrisporobacter, Escherichia-Shigella and Peptostreptococcaceae are synchronized with a decline in housefly-skin-sow feces samples of RFB. In housefly-crib-sow feces and housefly-handrail-sow feces samples, the number of eligible target genera dropped to four and five respectively. Among them, Weissella showed a significant decrease in all kinds of sample (Supplementary Table 5).