2. Results 2.1. BGCs Prediction of Streptomyces sp. 2-85 Streptomyces sp. 2-85 demonstrated the closest phylogenetic relationship with Streptomyces rochei S32, sharing 99.8% homology based on the 16 S rRNA gene sequence (Figure S1). The genome of Streptomyces rochei S32 was analyzed using antiSMASH 7.0 to assess its ability to form biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs). A total of 31 BGCs related to secondary metabolites were identified (Table S1), mainly including type I–III polyketide synthase (PKS I–III, 6), nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS, 1), hybrid (6), terpene (7), lanthipeptide (6), melanin (1), indole (2), ectoine (1), and saccharide (1). The predicted BGCs account for 16.39% (1318 Mb) of the entire bacterial chromosomal genome, of which 13 belong to PKS, NRPS, or mixed PKS-NRPS types; 28 BGCs show varying degrees of similarity to known BGCs; 11 BGCs show no more than 60% similarity to known BGCs; and the remaining 3 BGCs could not be recognized, suggesting that the strain still has the potential to produce novel natural products. 2.2. Anti-Microbial and Antifungal Activity Assessment and Variations in Secondary Metabolite Profiles under Different Cultivation Conditions The extract from Streptomyces sp. 2-85 mono-culture did not exhibit the expected levels of secondary metabolites, which was inconsistent with its genomic biosynthetic potential. Therefore, we employed metabolomic approaches to co-culture actinomycetes and fungi under different media and pH conditions and observed changes in the metabolites of co-cultures, aiming to elucidate the mechanism underlying the enhanced antibacterial effect of co-culture. The antibacterial activity of Streptomyces sp. 2-85 and Cladosporium sp. 3-22 was evaluated against six different indicator bacteria in liquid mono-culture or co-culture, as shown in Figure 1a. We observed that the cell-free culture supernatant of Potato Dextrose Broth (PDB) (pH 7.0) exhibited inhibition on all tested strains, both in mono- and co-cultures. Interestingly, co-culture under PDB (pH 7.0) conditions improved the antibacterial activity against B. subtilis and S. parasitica with 36.67% and 42.86% improvement compared to pure monoculture, respectively. As the co-culture combination of Streptomyces sp. 2-85 and Cladosporium sp. 3-22 showed excellent effects, we chose the combination under PDB (pH 7.0) for further analysis. In order to explore compounds potentially associated with antibacterial activity, we utilized LC-MS/MS under negative electrospray ionization (ESI−) conditions to cover as many compounds as possible in 2 mono-cultures and 4 co-cultures grown in different media (MM (Minimal Medium) or PDB) and pH conditions (pH 5.0 or 7.0). Unidentified molecular families may correspond to new molecules. A total of 1176 nodes were detected by the Mzmine software. Overall, approximately 43% (507 nodes) were unique to the mono-cultures, and about 12% (139 nodes) were newly synthesized during co-culture. Additionally, 45% (530 nodes) were shared between co-cultures and mono-cultures (Figure 1b). Among them, molecules detected during co-culture were mainly synthesized by fungal strains, possibly due to their larger proportion of the total biomass. In terms of different media, the total number of nodes produced in the PDB medium (532 nodes, 45%) was approximately twice that of the MM medium (286 nodes, 25%), with 26% of nodes showing an increase in new metabolites more than 4-fold (Figure 1c). It indicated that the PDB medium was significantly superior to the oligotrophic MM medium in metabolite production. Under different pH culture conditions, the total number of nodes produced at pH 7.0 (292 nodes, 25%) was approximately three times that at pH 5.0 (119 nodes, 10%), with 15% of nodes showing an increase in new metabolites more than 4-fold, too (Figure 1c). It suggested that the pH 7.0 culture condition was significantly better than pH 5.0 in terms of metabolite production. By comparing the structural spectra of compounds with the structures provided by MS-FINDER and determining the compound types based on matching mass peaks with MS/MS databases, only 13 specific compounds induced by co-culture were identified (Table S2), all of which were not detected in mono-cultures, indicating that the interactions between bacteria and fungi can activate or modulate biosynthetic pathways, thereby expanding the metabolite diversity. 2.3. Identification of Metabolites under Specific Cultivation Conditions (PDB, pH 7.0) To unravel the mechanism behind the enhanced antibacterial effectiveness against S. parasitica through co-culture, we employed metabolomic analysis to identify metabolic variations between Streptomyces sp. 2-85 and Cladosporium sp. 3-22 when co-cultured in PDB medium at pH 7.0. Partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) was employed to analyze and visualize the metabolic features of co-cultured and mono-cultured samples under culture conditions of PDB medium at pH 7.0. The PLS-DA results indicated that the samples were divided into three groups, showing that the co-culture group did not overlap with the other two corresponding mono-culture groups, thus allowing for the differentiation of the chemical compositions between co-cultures and mono-cultures (Figure 2a). Hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) of these 841 features based on MS data generated a heatmap, indicating global changes in the metabolome induced by co-culture (Figure 2b). Additionally, in the loading plot of PLS-DA, 69 compounds were off-center and clustered in the lower right corner of the plot (Figure 2c). Among them, 10 compounds (N1–N10) exhibited higher VIP scores in the PLS-DA analysis, indicating their significant contribution to the clusters (Figure 2d). To further explore the production of the most relevant active compounds potentially contributing to the observed antimicrobial activity, we analyzed the structures of the top 10 compounds identified by VIP. Among them, 6 priority molecules were detected at 14.93 min, namely N1 (m/z 436.2848 [M + H]+), N2 (m/z 472.3067 [M + H]+), N4 (m/z 454.2948 [M + H]+), N5 (m/z 490.3167 [M + H]+), N6 (m/z 436.2845 [M + H]+), and N10 (m/z 418.2738 [M + H]+). To more effectively visualize the differences in chemical profiles of strains under different culture conditions, the obtained data were transferred to the GNPS (Global Natural Products Social) molecular networks platform, where a Feature-Based Molecular Networking (FBMN) was generated. Subnetworks were exclusively generated from induced features lacking matches with database information. In each subnetwork, nodes represented parent ions and edges represented their structural relationships. It was found that these molecules clustered into one cluster in the molecular network (Figure 3c, cluster (5)), indicating close relationships among them. High-resolution mass spectrometry further confirmed that their molecular weights and fragmentation patterns were consistent with borrelidin. Among them, compound N5 was the parent ion, while the others were dehydrated (-H2O) analogs of borrelidin. Borrelidin is an 18-membered macrolide polyketide originally isolated from Streptomyces rochei, with potent anti-microbial activity [18]. It is noteworthy that borrelidin is encoded by a unique BGC in the genome of Streptomyces sp. 2-85, further reinforcing this hypothesis. Compared to the mono-culture extract of Streptomyces sp. 2-85, the content of borrelidin and its derivatives in the co-culture extract was significantly higher. The yields of compounds N1, N2, N4, and N5 increased more than 4-fold, while compounds N6 and N10 also showed significant increases only in co-culture (Figure S2a). Considering the reported activity of borrelidin and the hypothetical annotation of its presence in the co-culture extract, we found that this extract exhibited strong activity against S. parasitica. Furthermore, the inhibitory activity of borrelidin increased with increasing concentration, indicating dose dependency, consistent with previous descriptions of its antimalarial activity [19]. This provides a potential explanation for the observed differences in activity induced by co-culture to some extent, suggesting that the enhanced anti-S. parasitica activity may be related to the significant increase in borrelidin production. In order to clarify if other induced features corresponded to known metabolites, metabolite and chemical class annotations of 26 compounds within the other 21 distinct clusters were performed using the SIRIUS 4.9 workflow and manual dereplication based on comparative analysis of LC-MS/MS data in molecular networking (Figure 3a,b). Among them, 4 were exclusive to co-culture, 1 to Streptomyces sp. 2-85, and 4 to Cladosporium sp. 3-22, while 2 were shared between both mono-culture strains. High-resolution mass spectrometry confirmed that compounds N3, N7, N8, and N9 with a relatively minor upregulation exhibited molecular weights and fragmentation patterns consistent with Okaramine, Tanzawaic acid F, Dysidazirine, and Antibiotic S-632-C, respectively, indicating diverse biological activities [20,21,22,23]. Compared to mono-cultures, compounds 3, 12, 16, and 22 were only present in co-culture. Compound 21 exhibited the most significant increase, with a 30-fold increase in peak area. Compound 7 showed a 7-fold increase, while others increased slightly, covering various compound types (Figure S2b). Detailed annotations are provided in Table S3. Therefore, co-culture activation of silent biosynthetic pathways may amplify metabolic signatures, potentially uncovering novel molecules. This enhances active metabolite content, explaining the heightened antimicrobial efficacy observed in co-cultures compared to mono-cultures. 2.4. Isolation and Identification of Compounds Considering that the putative borrelidin in the co-culture extract showed strong activity against S. parasitica, we isolated and purified this compound to evaluate its anti-S. parasitica activity and verify the putative annotation of this compound. Compound N5 was obtained as yellow amorphous powder and its molecular formula was assigned as C28H42NO6 by ESI-HRMS at m/z 489.3090 [M − H]−. Its specific rotation is [α]25D − 0.41 (c 0.01, MeOH). Based on the comparison of the obtained MS (Figure S3), 1H-NMR, and 13C-NMR data (Figures S4 and S5, Table S4) with previously reported data, the structure of compound N5 was determined to be borrelidin (Figure S6). 2.5. Composition and Functional Analysis of Compound N5-Related Gene Clusters Considering the chemical identification of compound N5, we found that the type I polyketide synthase (PKS) of hybrid cluster 4 shares 81% similarities to the BGC0001533 identified in Streptomyces rochei (GenBank: KT362046.1) (Figure 4a). Sequence analysis showed that this gene cluster has 36 distinct open reading frames (ORFs), all of which have the characteristic high G+C content typical of Streptomyces. The gene responsible for the biosynthesis of compound N5 spans approximately 52 kb, with six ORFs (ctg1_398 to ctg1_403) encoding a type I PKS gene cluster, consisting of 25 individual domains forming six modules. The protein sequences, products, and functions most similar to each ORF in the gene cluster were deduced through BLAST analysis (Table S5). Flanking the PKS genes are additional genes (ctg1_404 to ctg1_410 on the left side and ctg1_390 to ctg1_396 on the right side) also involved in compound N5 biosynthesis. Some ORFs exhibit no significant similarity to known proteins, indicating they are not essential for compound N5 biosynthesis. Module 1 contains the AT and ACP domains. Each module contains conserved KS and ACP domains, along with AT domains exhibiting active site motifs containing serine residues. KR domains are present in all modules, with modules 2 and 4 also containing DH domains and module 4 additionally including an ER domain. Module 6 contains a thioesterase domain responsible for chain termination. Compound N5 contains a nitrile group at C12 within its macrolide ring. Sequence analysis of the AT structures in each module suggests that the carbon atom in the nitrile group and the methyl in methylmalonyl-CoA are derived from the same source. The ctg1_396 gene encodes cytochrome P450 hydroxylase responsible for catalyzing the methylation at the C12 position, while ctg1_395 encodes an aminotransferase introducing the nitrogen atom into the activated C28 position. The ctg1_390 gene is presumed to encode a seryl-tRNA synthetase acting as a self-resistance gene. Upstream and downstream genes may be involved in biosynthesis initiation. For example, ctg1_391 encodes a protein similar to a key enzyme involved in the aromatic amino acid carboxylate isomerization, while ctg1_407 may participate in the cyclization process of intermediate products. Other genes like ctg1_409, ctg1_408, ctg1_394, and ctg1_392 encode enzymes with dual activities of dehydrogenase and reductase. The functions of ctg1_406, ctg1_405, ctg1_404, and ctg1_393 show no significant similarity to protein products obtained in the database and require further experimental validation. The composition and biosynthetic process of each PKS module are illustrated in Figure 4b. 2.6. Determination of EC50 for Inhibition of Mycelial Growth and Spore Germination of S. parasitica by Compound N5 Compound N5 displayed a 45% inhibition rate at a concentration of 0.002 mg/mL, which increased to 72.5% at 0.025 mg/mL (Figure 5a). Therefore, the compound exhibited a notable impact on restraining the mycelium growth of S. parasitica with an EC50 of 0.004 mg/mL. Inhibition of zoospore germination contributes to reducing the rapid proliferation of propagules and is one of the important ways to mitigate diseases caused by S. parasitica [24]. Under different treatment concentrations, the inhibitory effect on zoospore germination can be distinctly observed through microscopy (Figure 5b). At a concentration of 0.0025 mg/mL of compound N5, spores germinated normally and formed branches, while at a concentration of 0.025 mg/mL of compound N5, germinating spores exhibited no apparent branching. At a concentration of 0.1 mg/mL of compound N5, zoospore germination was completely inhibited. Therefore, the EC50 for zoospore germination inhibition was determined to be 0.005 mg/mL. 2.7. Results of In Vitro Amino Acid Supplementation Experiments to Determine the Target of Action of Compound N5 Previous studies have indicated that borrelidin exerts its inhibitory effect on Phytophthora sojae by inhibiting the activity of threonyl-tRNA synthetase, and this inhibitory effect is dose-dependent on the concentration of threonine [25]. Therefore, in this study, different concentrations of threonine were added to investigate whether the inhibitory effect of compound N5 on S. parasitica shared the same target. As shown in Figure 5c, with increasing concentrations of threonine, the inhibitory rate of compound N5 on S. parasitica decreased, indicating a clear dose-dependent relationship between compound N5 and threonine at different concentrations. When four other amino acids (serine, glutamine, histidine, and asparagine) were added to the culture medium, no similar dose-dependent relationship was observed (Figure 5d). Therefore, it can be preliminarily concluded that the target of compound N5′s inhibitory effect on S. parasitica is threonyl-tRNA synthetase.