Results and discussion High-quality RNA is extracted from anaerobic fungi and fungal–methanogen co-cultures 2–5 days post inoculation High-quality RNA is the gold standard for transcriptomic studies as it remains unclear whether or not RNA degradation occurs uniformly across the transcriptome or at different rates (Gallego Romero et al., 2014). Degradation that is not uniform could result in inaccurate expression levels for genes of interest that do not accurately reflect in vivo production levels (Gallego Romero et al., 2014). Mechanical lysis through both bead beating and liquid nitrogen grinding has provided high-quality RNA for many previous transcriptional studies, effectively breaking through the chitin-rich rigid cell walls of anaerobic fungi to release nucleic acids (Haitjema et al., 2014). To prevent the heat generation associated with bead beating that leads to RNA degradation from occurring, in this study, liquid nitrogen was used to extract nucleic acids. The fungal monocultures of A. robustus and fungal–methanogen co-cultures of A. robustus and the methanogen M. bryantii were grown on Whatman filter paper, a cellulosic substrate. RNA was extracted from fungal cultures harvested on days 2–7 post inoculation into batch anaerobic culture using a liquid nitrogen grinding lysis method. Although there is no universally accepted criterion to determine whether or not a given RNA sample is suitable for inclusion in a given study, quality metrics, such as RNA integrity number (RIN) (Schroeder et al., 2006), are often used to determine relative sample quality (Gallego Romero et al., 2014). Samples were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq sequencer from anaerobic fungal monocultures and fungal–methanogen co-cultures on days 2–5 post-inoculation into anaerobic batch cultures (co-culture samples from day 6 were also sequenced). A plot of RNA concentrations and RNA integrity number equivalent (RINe) scores for cultures harvested over 10 days of growth is shown in 
Figure 1A
 (monocultures) and 
Figure 1B
 (co-cultures). RNA degradation was the most pronounced in the cultures harvested on days 6 and 7, which marks the beginning of the stationary phase based on accumulated pressure measurements, likely leading to the failure to sequence monoculture samples collected on day 6 and failure to sequence both the monoculture and co-culture samples on day 7. Although there is no generally accepted criterion for sample inclusion based on quality, samples with RINe scores as low as 3.95 have been included in previously published studies (Weis et al., 2007), and the average concentration of samples harvested on days 2–7 in this study exceeded that threshold. RIN and RINe values are both ranked on a scale from 1 to 10, with the highest value indicating no degradation; however, in contrast to RIN, RINe is a representation of the relative ratio of the signal in the fast zone to the 18S peak signal and provides a faster method of determining the total RNA integrity (Agilent Technologies, 2016). RIN and RINe have been shown to be equivalent for an Agilent 2200 TapeStation system and the Agilent R6K ScreenTape, when measuring RINe, and the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer, when measuring RIN (Agilent Technologies, 2016). The JGI recommends that samples submitted for sequencing have an RNA Quality Number (RQN) above 6.0 (Chovatia et al., 2018). All sample groups (days 2–7) had an average RINe score that exceeded this threshold (
Figure 1
). Figure 1RNA concentrations and RINe scores for cultures harvested over 7 days of growth post-inoculation for fungal monocultures of A. robustus
(A) and fungal-methanogen co-cultures of A. robustus and M. bryantii
(B) both grown on a cellulose substrate (Whatman filter paper). RNA was extracted from cultures harvested on days 2-7 using a liquid nitrogen grinding lysis method. Samples were sequenced from both conditions on days 2-5 (co-culture samples from day 6 were also successfully sequenced). RNA degradation was more pronounced and RNA concentration decreased in cultures harvested on days 6 and 7, likely leading to the failure to sequence monoculture samples collected on day 6 and both monoculture and co-culture samples on day 7. The mean value is plotted for each set of replicates and error bars indicate standard deviation. RNA concentrations and RINe scores for cultures harvested over 7 days of growth post-inoculation for fungal monocultures of A. robustus
(A) and fungal-methanogen co-cultures of A. robustus and M. bryantii
(B) both grown on a cellulose substrate (Whatman filter paper). RNA was extracted from cultures harvested on days 2-7 using a liquid nitrogen grinding lysis method. Samples were sequenced from both conditions on days 2-5 (co-culture samples from day 6 were also successfully sequenced). RNA degradation was more pronounced and RNA concentration decreased in cultures harvested on days 6 and 7, likely leading to the failure to sequence monoculture samples collected on day 6 and both monoculture and co-culture samples on day 7. The mean value is plotted for each set of replicates and error bars indicate standard deviation. RNA concentrations from both fungal monocultures and fungal–methanogen co-cultures were above 30 ng/µL in cultures harvested on days 2–4 during the exponential growth phase, then average concentrations decreased to half or less of that amount for days 5–7, marking the end of the exponential growth phase and the beginning of the stationary growth phase. The beginning of the stationary growth phase could have also contributed to the failure to sequence monoculture samples collected on day 6 and the failure to sequence both monoculture and co-culture samples on day 7. The JGI recommends that eukaryotic RNA samples in the low-input category have a concentration range of 10–1,000 ng/μL ( , ). The average concentration of fungal monoculture samples harvested on days 2–6 and the average concentration of fungal–methanogen co-cultures harvested on days 2–4 met this criterion (although the average concentration of co-cultures harvested on day 5 was extremely close—the average concentration for these samples was 9.7 ng/μL). These findings indicate that the optimal timepoint for RNA extraction from this anaerobic fungus ranges from day 2 to 5 post-inoculation, encompassing the exponential growth phase, based on both quantity and quality measures and whether or not the harvested samples could be sequenced. The fungus used in this study, A. robustus, is a polycentric fungus with multinucleate rhizomycelia (Haitjema et al., 2017; Mondo et al., 2017). This range could vary for other fungal strains or microbial pairings as a result of biological differences, such as the presence or absence of rhizoidal structures, as nuclei are present in the rhizomycelium of polycentric fungi (Tsai and Calza, 1992; Haitjema et al., 2014). Therefore, future studies should be conducted to determine whether this range for capturing sufficient RNA quantity/quality is generalizable across more anaerobic fungal genera. Overall CAZyme regulation in anaerobic fungal co-cultures depends on the time of harvest during the exponential growth phase Multiple previous studies (Li et al., 2019; Swift et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2021) have found that fungal CAZymes are upregulated in cocultivation with a methanogen in multiple growth conditions, such as media formulation, substrate, or using a particular fungal strain. However, these studies used only one or at the most two time points of RNA collection during the growth phase of fungal monocultures and co-cultures, calling into question whether or not these findings would hold throughout the entire duration of co-culture cultivation (Li et al., 2019; Swift et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2021). One previous study investigated the transcriptional response in exponential gut fungal monocultures when pulsed with glucose for six time points over a relatively short 28-h time period (Solomon et al., 2016a). Recent research has determined that CAZymes are regulated at the mid-log growth phase and late growth phase of a gut fungal monoculture, and also in co-culture with a methanogen grown on glucose (Li et al., 2019), noting a change in CAZyme regulation between the growth phases. However, it remains unclear how differences in growth stage affect the outcome of CAZyme-focused transcriptional studies, and to what extent the timeline of cultivation drives the differences observed in these studies. Determining the optimal time frame for maximal expression of CAZymes is also crucial to informing bioprocessing strategies that seek to use anaerobic fungi, as the prevalence of CAZymes within a bioreactor determines the efficiency with which a batch culture can degrade plant biomass substrates. DESeq2 was used to determine that 1,002 unique genes were differentially expressed (419 upregulated and 583 downregulated) by the anaerobic fungus A. robustus over the 4 days (days 2–5 post-inoculation) when examined in fungal–methanogen co-culture as compared with a fungal monoculture. Lists of upregulated and downregulated genes in the co-culture, as compared with a monoculture condition, can be found in the 
Supplementary Data File
. Days 2–4 post inoculation fell within the exponential growth phase and day 5 post inoculation marked the beginning of the stationary growth phase based on measurements of pressure accumulation in the headspace of the cultures, which serves as a proxy for growth in the absence of quantitative methods to measure fungal cells grown on an insoluble substrate (Theodorou et al., 1995). Although the average accumulated pressure was slightly higher overall under co-cultivation, it did not appear to affect when the shift from exponential growth to stationary growth occurred relative to fungal monoculture. Out of the unique genes that were differentially expressed, 200 of those genes encoded fungal CAZymes. GSEA preranked analysis of CAZyme regulation revealed that CAZymes were enriched in upregulated genes in co-culture compared with monoculture on days 3 and 5 (significant at a false discovery rate, FDR, of < 25%), but not on days 2 and 4, as indicated in the 
Supplementary Data File
. The day that cultures were harvested post-inoculation affected the total number of CAZymes regulated and whether or not more CAZyme genes were upregulated or downregulated when comparing co-cultures with monocultures. These findings reveal that the overall upregulation of fungal genes annotated as CAZymes in fungal–methanogen co-cultures relative to fungal monocultures observed in previous studies was likely to be highly dependent on the time of harvest. These cultures were grown on filter paper, a cellulose substrate, and, therefore, results could vary if cultures are grown on other substrates, such as glucose or lignocellulose. Previous research has indicated that a common regulatory network for diverse CAZymes is upregulated for a variety of substrates; however, results from previous studies have also indicated that the gene expression levels of specific enzyme types for similar reactions were differentially regulated as a function of growth substrate (Solomon et al., 2016b). This indicates that a substrate-specific catabolic response also occurs in response to the presence of a particular growth substrate (Solomon et al., 2016b). Cellulosome components are transcriptionally upregulated in batch co-culture of fungi and methanogens with variation in expression at 24-hour intervals The breakdown of biomass by anaerobic fungi is aided by extracellular fungal cellulosomes that consist of a catalytic complex that includes dockerins, carbohydrate-binding modules, and CAZymes grouped together for improved hydrolysis (Haitjema et al., 2017). A previous study examining one timepoint for RNA harvest indicated that growth on insoluble substrates such as filter paper, Avicel®, or reed canary grass induced expression of fungal cellulosomes for enhanced degradation in fungal monoculture (Solomon et al., 2016b). A second study found that co-culture of a non-rhizoidal fungal strain with a methanogen increased transcription of carbohydrate-binding modules and dockerin domains in co-cultures grown on cellulose (Avicel™) (Brown et al., 2021). We would therefore expect the expression of cellulosome components and the transcriptional upregulation of carbohydrate-binding modules and dockerins in co-culture to enhance the degradation capability of growth on the cellulosic filter paper substrate used in this study. We found that the regulation of fungal genes annotated as dockerins and carbohydrate-binding modules, and also the CAZymes glycoside hydrolases, carbohydrate esterases, glycosyl transferases, and polysaccharide lyases in fungal–methanogen co-culture relative to fungal monoculture varied at each 24-hour timepoint of the exponential growth phase. This indicates that cocultivation with a methanogen upregulates the expression of cellulosome components, which was the conclusion reached by previous studies, and is dependent on the time of harvest, as shown in 
Figure 2
. These results suggest that co-culture with a methanogen bolsters the upregulation of cellulosome components observed previously in fungal monocultures grown on insoluble substrates, such as cellulose, at specific points in the growth phase. Only three genes annotated as CAZymes, carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs), and/or as containing dockerin domains were upregulated under the cocultivation conditions on day 2. It is possible that this occurred because the fungus had not yet transcriptionally responded to the presence of the methanogen. Figure 2Dockerin regulation in Anaeromyces robustus and Methanobacterium bryantii co-culture as compared with A. robustus monoculture indicates that transcriptional upregulation of these cellulosome components is dependent on the time of batch culture harvest post inoculation. Regulated genes annotated as containing dockerin domains were upregulated on days 3 and 5—none were downregulated at these harvest timepoints, although the downregulation of genes annotated as containing dockerin domains was observed for cultures harvested on days 2 and 4. Regulation is determined using log2-fold change in expression, ranging from 6 to –6. The legend indicates which type of CAZyme the dockerin is fused to and if a CBM is also present. “Unknown” indicates that the dockerin is fused to a gene of unknown function. The transcriptional upregulation of these cellulosome components in fungal–methanogen co-cultures relative to fungal monocultures is dependent on the time of harvest for batch cultures grown on a cellulose substrate, with the regulation of largely unique dockerin-fused gene groups at harvest on a given day of growth post-inoculation. CAZyme, carbohydrate-active enzyme; CBM, carbohydrate-binding module. Dockerin regulation in Anaeromyces robustus and Methanobacterium bryantii co-culture as compared with A. robustus monoculture indicates that transcriptional upregulation of these cellulosome components is dependent on the time of batch culture harvest post inoculation. Regulated genes annotated as containing dockerin domains were upregulated on days 3 and 5—none were downregulated at these harvest timepoints, although the downregulation of genes annotated as containing dockerin domains was observed for cultures harvested on days 2 and 4. Regulation is determined using log2-fold change in expression, ranging from 6 to –6. The legend indicates which type of CAZyme the dockerin is fused to and if a CBM is also present. “Unknown” indicates that the dockerin is fused to a gene of unknown function. The transcriptional upregulation of these cellulosome components in fungal–methanogen co-cultures relative to fungal monocultures is dependent on the time of harvest for batch cultures grown on a cellulose substrate, with the regulation of largely unique dockerin-fused gene groups at harvest on a given day of growth post-inoculation. CAZyme, carbohydrate-active enzyme; CBM, carbohydrate-binding module. Many fungal glycosyl hydrolases (GHs) assist in breaking down the cellulosic and hemicellulosic components of plant biomass (Murphy et al., 2011). Although several genes annotated as glycosyl hydrolases were downregulated on day 4, and two genes annotated as GHs were downregulated on day 2, most differentially expressed genes annotated as GHs were upregulated on days 3 and 5, as shown in 
Figure 3
. The majority of genes annotated as GHs that were upregulated in fungal–methanogen co-culture on day 3 were hemicellulases, and the majority of genes annotated as GHs that were upregulated in the fungal–methanogen co-culture on days 4 and 5 were cellulases. As hemicellulases remove the hemicellulose in plant biomass to provide access to cellulose (Himmel et al., 2007), this observed pattern of regulation could be due to an adaptive upregulation of enzymes in co-culture to free the core of plant biomass before cellulase regulation increases, even though cellulose was the only substrate present in this experiment (Solomon et al., 2016b). Figure 3Glycosyl hydrolase regulation in co-cultures of Anaeromyces robustus and Methanobacterium bryantii as compared with A. robustus monoculture grown on a cellulose substrate reveals sequential upregulation of hemicellulase and cellulase enzymes. Although several genes annotated as GHs were downregulated on day 4 and two genes annotated as GHs were downregulated on day 2, only one gene annotated as a GH was downregulated on days 3 and 5—all other differentially expressed genes annotated as GHs were upregulated on days 3 and 5 in a regulation pattern similar to that observed for regulation of genes containing dockerin domains. The majority of genes annotated as GHs that were upregulated in fungal–methanogen co-culture on day 3 were hemicellulases, and the majority of genes annotated as GHs that were upregulated in fungal–methanogen co-culture on days 4 and 5 were cellulases. This observation could be attributed to an adaptive upregulation of enzymes in co-culture to free the core of plant biomass before cellulase regulation increases. Regulation is determined using log2-fold change in expression, ranging from 6 to –6. The legend indicates whether a given gene annotated as a GH is classified as a cellulase (C), a hemicellulase (H), or other (O) and whether the GH is a free enzyme or fused to a CBM and/or dockerin domain. GH, glycosyl hydrolase; CBM, carbohydrate-binding module. Glycosyl hydrolase regulation in co-cultures of Anaeromyces robustus and Methanobacterium bryantii as compared with A. robustus monoculture grown on a cellulose substrate reveals sequential upregulation of hemicellulase and cellulase enzymes. Although several genes annotated as GHs were downregulated on day 4 and two genes annotated as GHs were downregulated on day 2, only one gene annotated as a GH was downregulated on days 3 and 5—all other differentially expressed genes annotated as GHs were upregulated on days 3 and 5 in a regulation pattern similar to that observed for regulation of genes containing dockerin domains. The majority of genes annotated as GHs that were upregulated in fungal–methanogen co-culture on day 3 were hemicellulases, and the majority of genes annotated as GHs that were upregulated in fungal–methanogen co-culture on days 4 and 5 were cellulases. This observation could be attributed to an adaptive upregulation of enzymes in co-culture to free the core of plant biomass before cellulase regulation increases. Regulation is determined using log2-fold change in expression, ranging from 6 to –6. The legend indicates whether a given gene annotated as a GH is classified as a cellulase (C), a hemicellulase (H), or other (O) and whether the GH is a free enzyme or fused to a CBM and/or dockerin domain. GH, glycosyl hydrolase; CBM, carbohydrate-binding module. The removal of hemicellulose from plant biomass to free cellulose is accompanied by pectin removal by polysaccharide lyases (PLs) and carbohydrate esterases (CEs). The regulation of genes annotated as CEs and PLs is shown in 
Supplemental Figures 1
 and 
2
. Although 11 genes annotated as CEs were downregulated on day 4 of growth post-inoculation, genes annotated as CEs and PLs were only upregulated in the cocultivation condition on days 3 and 5 of growth post-inoculation. Specifically, six genes annotated as CEs and one gene annotated as PL were upregulated on day 3 of growth. In addition, 11 genes annotated as CEs and one gene annotated as PL were upregulated on day 5 of growth. This demonstrates that cocultivation with a methanogen increases the transcription of genes associated with the pectin-removal process of biomass breakdown in the presence of cellulose, even if pectin is absent. GTs were only downregulated (exclusively on day 4) and not regulated on any of the other days, as shown in 
Supplemental Figure 2
. These findings collectively indicate that CAZyme production may not be consistent over the entire exponential growth phase. The transcriptional regulation on days 3 and 5 would suggest that the previously observed patterns of cellulase and cellulosome component upregulation on insoluble substrates, such as filter paper, are enhanced by cocultivation with a methanogen, as indicated by previous studies that examined one or two specific timepoints only. Fungal secondary metabolite core genes are upregulated in early growth with slight elevations of primary metabolites glucose and acetate in co-culture relative to monoculture in late growth In addition to CAZyme regulation, the regulation of biosynthetic genes has also been examined in transcriptional studies (Swift et al., 2021b; Swift et al., 2021a). For this analysis, we considered the predicted core and accessory SM gene annotations, where core genes encode SM biosynthetic enzymes and accessory genes encode supporting functions, such as tailoring enzymes, transport, and self-resistance. There were 45 putative biosynthetic gene clusters with 14 total polyketide synthase (PKS) or PKS-like core genes in the A. robustus genome. In total, there were 47 predicted core genes and 70 predicted accessory genes across all biosynthetic gene clusters, as shown in the 
Supplementary Data File
. It is traditionally thought that secondary metabolite production occurs during the stationary growth phase of a microbe (Ruiz et al., 2010). However, in agreement with previous work (Swift et al., 2021b; Swift et al., 2021a), in both the A. robustus monoculture and in the A. robustus and M. bryantii co-culture, we observed the upregulation of only a few putative biosynthetic genes in A. robustus at later days in the growth phase. Contrary to expectations, all 14 PKS/PKS-like core genes in the A. robustus genome were upregulated in early A. robustus monoculture, and 13 out of the 14 genes were upregulated in co-culture with the methanogen M. bryantii. In addition, of the 10 most highly expressed predicted SM core genes, a majority were significantly upregulated at earlier growth (day 2) compared with late growth under both monoculture (day 5) and co-culture conditions (day 6), as shown in the 
Supplementary Data File
. These findings, in agreement with previous studies, suggest that anaerobic fungi may be unique in their tendency to transcriptionally upregulate biosynthetic genes early in the growth phase before other microbes typically make the metabolic shift to secondary metabolite production in the stationary growth phase. In the synergistic relationship that exists between fungi and methanogens, the methanogens remove hydrogen produced by the fungi and convert it to methane, resulting in the increased fungal production of acetate, formate, lactate, and ethanol over time. No significant differences were observed in ethanol, lactate, and formate levels between the monocultures of A. robustus and co-cultures of A. robustus and M. bryantii during this experiment, as shown in 
Supplemental Figures 3–5
. In co-cultures, we observed slightly higher acetate and glucose levels than in monocultures on day 5, as shown in 
Supplemental Figure 6
. A lack of statistically significant differences among the fermentation products is largely in agreement with what has been observed previously in a comparison of fermentation products produced in the monocultures of A. robustus with the co-cultures of A. robustus and M. bryantii, except that lactate was detected in the co-cultures but not in the monocultures on the third day of growth on a reed canary grass substrate. Although there were higher levels of acetate present in co-cultures on day 5 of this experiment, there was no statistically significant difference in acetate levels on day 3 (Swift et al., 2019). Notably, the methanogen M. bryantii does not appear to utilize formate in this fungal–methanogen pairing grown for 5 days on filter paper. This contrasts with previous studies, in which M. bryantii was observed to utilize the formate produced by the fungus in a pairing of M. bryantii with A. robustus grown on filter paper for 10 days (Gilmore et al., 2019), and another study in which M. bryantii was observed to utilize formate produced by the fungus in a pairing of M. bryantii with C. churrovis grown on Avicel, reed canary grass, glucose, fructose, and xylan (Brown et al., 2021). This observation implies that the previous hypothesis that co-culture with rumen anaerobic fungi stimulates formate utilization by inducing the function of a formate transporter and formate dehydrogenase in the M. bryantii genome (Ruiz et al., 2010) may not be applicable until much later in the growth phase for certain strains or growth conditions.