Results MsrD provides macrolide and ketolide resistance The mefA/msrD macrolide resistance operon (Fig. 1a) is part of the MEGA element currently spreading among clinical and livestock isolates33,36–38. A phylogenetical analysis (Supplementary Fig. 1a) shows that the operon disseminates predominantly in Gram-positive firmicutes (mostly Streptococci) and in some Gram-negative proteobacteria (such as Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria gonorrhoeae or Escherichia coli). The gene msrD shares ~62 % identity with its closest homolog msrE7, both factors exhibiting the canonical ABC-F domains organization (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 1b). The model bacterium Escherichia coli (E. coli) presents undeniable advantages for genetic and molecular biology, but the presence of multidrug efflux systems greatly limits its use in antibiotic research39,40. To circumvent this limitation, we took advantage of the E. coli DB10 strain, which exhibits exacerbated sensitivity to macrolide antibiotics41,42. Heterologous expression of the wild-type (WT) gene msrD from an arabinose-inducible promoter conferred macrolide and ketolide resistance phenotype to the strain (Table 1), demonstrating the functionality of the factor in this organism. Expression of msrDWT resulted in eightfold minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) increase for the 14-membered macrolide ERY, 8-fold for the 15-membered macrolide azithromycin (AZI) and 2-fold for telithromycin (TEL, a ketolide antibiotic derived from the 14-membered macrolides). Similar results were reported for Streptococcus pneumoniae clinical isolates23. However, no change in MIC was observed for the 16-membered macrolides tylosin (TYL) and spiramycin (SPI), or the non-macrolide antibiotics lincomycin (LNC), linezolid (LNZ) and retapamulin (RTP) (Table 1).Table 1Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of E. coli DB10 expressing msrDWT in the presence of ribosome-targeting antibioticspBAD-ControlpBAD-msrDWTAntibioticMIC (µM)IC50 (µM)MIC (µM)IC50 (µM)Erythromycin20,179 ± 0,007164,592 ± 0,582Azithromycin0.250,046 ± 0,00220,953 ± 0,053Telithromycin10,086 ± 0,00820,714 ± 0,066Tylosin41,649 ± 0,15141,672 ± 0,103Spiramycin20,758 ± 0,06320,81 ± 0,078Lincomycin3212,61 ± 2,1543212,62 ± 1,27Linezolid3213,62 ± 2,0643213,41 ± 1,137Retapamulin10,071 ± 0,00410,075 ± 0,007See Methods for experimental details. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of E. coli DB10 expressing msrDWT in the presence of ribosome-targeting antibiotics pBAD-Control pBAD-msrDWT. Antibiotic MIC (µM) IC50 (µM) MIC (µM) IC50 (µM). Erythromycin 2 0,179 ± 0,007 16 4,592 ± 0,582. Azithromycin 0.25 0,046 ± 0,002 2 0,953 ± 0,053. Telithromycin 1 0,086 ± 0,008 2 0,714 ± 0,066. Tylosin 4 1,649 ± 0,151 4 1,672 ± 0,103. Spiramycin 2 0,758 ± 0,063 2 0,81 ± 0,078. Lincomycin 32 12,61 ± 2,154 32 12,62 ± 1,27. Linezolid 32 13,62 ± 2,064 32 13,41 ± 1,137. Retapamulin 1 0,071 ± 0,004 1 0,075 ± 0,007. See Methods for experimental details. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. To understand the function of the ATPase activity of MsrD, we constructed ATPase-deficient variants MsrDE125Q, MsrDE434Q and MsrDE125Q/E434Q (hereafter referred as MsrDEQ2) by replacing the catalytic glutamic acid residue (E) in the Walker B motif of each or both ABC domains by a glutamine (Q) (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 1b). This mutation strongly reduces the ATP hydrolysis while preserving the local stereochemistry of the active site and has been extensively used to trap ABC-F factors on the ribosome in ATP-bound conformation1–3,5,9. Protein expression levels have been assessed by western blot for each tested variants (Supplementary Fig. 1c). We evaluated the influence of E-to-Q mutations of MsrD on bacterial growth and antibiotic resistance phenotypes and showed that all the mutations impair both phenotypes (Fig. 1c). While MsrDE125Q and MsrDEQ2 mutations had a similar effect on bacterial growth in the absence or at low ERY concentration, the MsrDE434Q mutant was more toxic. However, MsrDE125Q maintained some resistance (MIC = 4 µM) compared to control (MIC = 2 µM). This observation was supported by the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) measurement of the MsrDE125Q strain which was ~8 times higher than Control (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 1). The two ATP hydrolysis sites (Supplementary Fig. 1b) were therefore concluded to perform different tasks and are functionally asymmetric, as previously reported for the ARE ABC-F Vga(A)43. We also evaluated the importance of other MsrD residues. The truncation of the PtIM (replaced by three glycines) or just the Loop (∆PtIM, ∆Loop respectively) completely abolished the resistance phenotype in vivo (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Fig. 1e). This has been previously reported in vitro for the MsrE7. Punctual mutations in the Loop (Fig. 1c) affected the resistance phenotype to a different extent. Mutation of residue R241 to alanine had almost no effect on the phenotype, but equivalent mutation for residues L242 or H244 reduced the IC50 by ~3 fold (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 1). This demonstrated that these residues are important, but are not essential for MsrD function despite being predicted to be located at the vicinity of the antibiotic (Supplementary Fig. 1d) in the MsrE-ribosome complex7. Interestingly, this finding contrasts with the mutagenesis assays for MsrE, showing that the mutation R241A reduced the resistance by more than 50%7. Replacement of residue H244 by the larger residue tryptophan should displace the drug by steric occlusion, but the variant lost most of its antibiotic resistance phenotype (Fig. 1c). Similarly, MsrDWT does not provide resistance to TYL nor SPI (Table 1), despite predicted clash of both antibiotics with MsrD according to the MsrE structure (Supplementary Fig. 1d). The same observation was made with LNC, LNZ and RTP (Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1d). Therefore, MsrD’s action on the antibiotic is indirect, and direct steric occlusion to displace the antibiotic seems unlikely. Ribosome-mediated transcriptional attenuation regulates msrD expression Analysis of the mefA/msrD operon sequence indicates a stringent ribosome binding site (RBS) only 8 bp downstream of the gene mefA stop codon. This sequence was proposed to be required for the translation of the downstream putative small ORF, msrDL (Supplementary Fig. 2a). In order to test the influence of msrDL on msrD expression, a fluorescent reporter with the sequence spanning from the first nucleotide downstream mefA stop codon to msrD first three codons fused to the Yellow Fluorescent Protein gene (YFP) was cloned in the low copy pMMB plasmid44 under the control of an IPTG-inducible PLlacO-1 promoter45. The resulting plasmid, pMMB-msrDL-msrD(1-3):yfp, was used to directly follow the fluorescence signal reflecting the yfp expression (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 2b).Fig. 2Erythromycin-dependent transcriptional attenuation regulates msrD expression.a ERY-dependent induction of msrD(1-3):yfp. Fluorescent reporters shown on schematics have been introduced in E. coli DB10 and grown in presence of 1 mM IPTG and increasing sublethal ERY concentrations during 17 h. Fluorescence has been plotted against OD600, error bars for both axes represent mean ± s.d. for triplicate experiments. b Northern analysis of msrD transcript. RNAs were extracted before adding or not 1 mM IPTG (T0’), 10 min after adding IPTG (T10’), and 5, 15, 30, 60, 120 min after adding or not 100 nM ERY. Location of probe in msrD(1-3):yfp 3’ UTR is shown on the schematic. The presence of a second band was also observed, but we hypothesized that it was an abortive transcript resulting from the construct insofar as its presence correlated with induction by IPTG and ERY. Note the presence of leaky transcription in absence of IPTG, that is slightly amplified in presence of ERY. c Deletion of the intrinsic terminator between msrDL and msrD(1-3):yfp lead to a constitutive induction in absence of ERY. Error bars for both axes represent mean ± s.d. for triplicate experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Fig. 2Erythromycin-dependent transcriptional attenuation regulates msrD expression.a ERY-dependent induction of msrD(1-3):yfp. Fluorescent reporters shown on schematics have been introduced in E. coli DB10 and grown in presence of 1 mM IPTG and increasing sublethal ERY concentrations during 17 h. Fluorescence has been plotted against OD600, error bars for both axes represent mean ± s.d. for triplicate experiments. b Northern analysis of msrD transcript. RNAs were extracted before adding or not 1 mM IPTG (T0’), 10 min after adding IPTG (T10’), and 5, 15, 30, 60, 120 min after adding or not 100 nM ERY. Location of probe in msrD(1-3):yfp 3’ UTR is shown on the schematic. The presence of a second band was also observed, but we hypothesized that it was an abortive transcript resulting from the construct insofar as its presence correlated with induction by IPTG and ERY. Note the presence of leaky transcription in absence of IPTG, that is slightly amplified in presence of ERY. c Deletion of the intrinsic terminator between msrDL and msrD(1-3):yfp lead to a constitutive induction in absence of ERY. Error bars for both axes represent mean ± s.d. for triplicate experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Erythromycin-dependent transcriptional attenuation regulates msrD expression. a ERY-dependent induction of msrD(1-3):yfp. Fluorescent reporters shown on schematics have been introduced in E. coli DB10 and grown in presence of 1 mM IPTG and increasing sublethal ERY concentrations during 17 h. Fluorescence has been plotted against OD600, error bars for both axes represent mean ± s.d. for triplicate experiments. b Northern analysis of msrD transcript. RNAs were extracted before adding or not 1 mM IPTG (T0’), 10 min after adding IPTG (T10’), and 5, 15, 30, 60, 120 min after adding or not 100 nM ERY. Location of probe in msrD(1-3):yfp 3’ UTR is shown on the schematic. The presence of a second band was also observed, but we hypothesized that it was an abortive transcript resulting from the construct insofar as its presence correlated with induction by IPTG and ERY. Note the presence of leaky transcription in absence of IPTG, that is slightly amplified in presence of ERY. c Deletion of the intrinsic terminator between msrDL and msrD(1-3):yfp lead to a constitutive induction in absence of ERY. Error bars for both axes represent mean ± s.d. for triplicate experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. A basal fluorescence level was found to be stable in the E. coli DB10 strain containing pMMB-Control independently of ERY concentration (Fig. 2a), while a fluorescence increase that correlated with the increase in ERY concentration was observed in cells containing the plasmid pMMB-msrDL-msrD(1-3):yfp. This indicated an ERY-dependent induction of msrD. Optimal induction was found at 100 nM ERY, however, 6.25 nM was sufficient to significantly induce msrD(1-3):yfp expression, demonstrating high sensitivity of the system toward its inducer. A reduced, but significant fluorescence signal was detected at 0 nM ERY indicating an imperfect repression of the regulation. Inactivation of the ORF msrDL by replacing the start codon with an amber stop codon (pMMB-msrDL(no_ORF)-msrD(1-3):yfp) resulted in the elimination of the fluorescence induction (Fig. 2a). This demonstrated that msrDL translation is an important and necessary cis-acting feature that regulates msrD(1-3):yfp expression as previously reported for ermC46. In bacteria, antibiotic-dependent gene induction relies mainly on translational or transcriptional attenuation47. To determine if msrDL prompts a transcriptional or translational attenuation, northern blot analysis with a probe located in msrD(1-3):yfp 3’ UTR was performed on total RNA extracted from bacteria with or without ERY and/or IPTG exposure. A 1.2-kb band corresponding to the msrDL-msrD(1-3):yfp mRNA was detected in the presence of IPTG and started to increase incrementally 5 min after exposure to 100 nM ERY (Fig. 2b). Consistent with this ERY-dependent transcript accumulation, we concluded that msrD regulation by msrDL occurs at the transcription level. Transcription attenuation employs premature transcription termination via: (i) Rho-dependent terminator (RDT) by binding of Rho factor, a RecA-type ATPase, to a C-rich and G-poor sequence known as Rho utilization site48; (ii) Rho-independent terminator (RIT) where a stable GC-rich stem-loop followed by a poly-uridine sequence causes RNAP to drop off49. Treatment with bicyclomycin, a Rho inhibitor, did not result in constitutive expression of the reporter, thus excluding the possibility of a RDT attenuation (Supplementary Fig. 2c). Search for secondary structures in the intergenic region between the genes msrDL and msrD using ARNold server50 revealed the presence of a RIT with a ∆G of −7.9 kcal.mol−1. We also identified a consensus “TTNTTT” NusG-dependent RNAP pausing site embedded in the msrDL sequence (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Fig. 2a), as previously described for vmlR51,52. In order to test possible transcription termination activity, we generated a msrDL-msrD construct that lacks the putative terminator (referred as pMMB-msrDL(no_term)-msrD(1-3):yfp). The deletion of the terminator resulted in a constitutive expression of the fluorescent reporter in the absence of ERY, indicating that the terminator is a necessary cis-acting regulatory feature that terminates transcription (Fig. 2c). These results validate the presence of a second transcriptional attenuator on the mefA/msrD operon that regulates exclusively the gene msrD. Selective drug-sensing by MsrDL prevents its translation elongation and termination To determine how this regulation occurs via a ribosome-mediated mechanism, translation of msrDL mRNA with the PURE system53 was subjected to various antibiotics and its propensity to form SRC was analyzed by toeprinting54 (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 3). A strong toeprint signal was observed in the presence of ERY and AZI, while it was absent in the presence of TEL, TYL and SPI (Fig. 3a). This in vitro result correlates to the in vivo observations made with the msrD(1-3):yfp reporter gene which was also only induced by ERY and AZI, but not by TEL, TYL, SPI and non-macrolide antibiotics (Fig. 3b).Fig. 3MsrDL is a macrolide-sensing nascent chain that stalls the ribosome.a Toeprinting assay of msrDL in the absence (-) or in the presence of 50 µM of various macrolide antibiotics. White arrow indicates initiation codon. Black arrows indicate ribosome stalling, with M6 codon in the P site. Chemical structure of antibiotics is shown, C3 cladinose sugar of ERY and AZI being highlighted. See also Supplementary Fig. 3. b In vivo induction of msrD(1:3):yfp by various PTC/NPET targeting antibiotics. Bacteria containing pMMB-msrDL-msrD(1:3):yfp were grown for 17 h in the presence of 1 mM IPTG, in the absence (gray histograms) or in the presence of 50 nM antibiotics (red histograms). c Toeprinting assay depleted of release factors was performed in the absence of ribosome (line 1), in the presence of 50 µM RTP to assess start codon (line 2), without or with 50 µM ERY (line 3 and 4), without or with 50 µM ERY then supplemented with 100 µM puromycin (line 5 and 6), without or with 50 µM ERY in the presence of RF1/RF2/RF3 (line 7 and 8). The schematic indicates position of toeprint signal on the synthetic mRNA, P site codon of MsrDL-SRC is underlined. See also Supplementary Fig. 3. d Effects of msrDL variants on the expression of msrD(1:3):yfp. Bacteria were grown during 17 h in the presence of 1 mM IPTG, in the absence (gray histograms) or in the presence of 100 nM ERY (red histograms). Square boxes show fold of induction. e Toeprinting assay performed on the MsrDLWT, MsrDLL3A and MsrDLI4A constructs in the absence or presence of 50 µM ERY or 100 µM puromycin. Open arrow indicates the initiation codon. Black arrows indicate ribosomal stalling, with the M6 codon in the P site. f Toeprinting assay performed on the MsrDL7A-iso construct in the absence or presence of ERY. Addition of a sense codon after M6 codon lead to translational arrest with M6 codon in the P site (black arrows) and A7 codon in the A site in the presence of ERY. A faint toeprint was also observed with A7 codon in the P site (gray arrows) and the stop codon in the A site. b, c Error bars represent mean ± s.d. for triplicate experiments and the p values were determined by unpaired two-sided t-test without adjustment. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Fig. 3MsrDL is a macrolide-sensing nascent chain that stalls the ribosome.a Toeprinting assay of msrDL in the absence (-) or in the presence of 50 µM of various macrolide antibiotics. White arrow indicates initiation codon. Black arrows indicate ribosome stalling, with M6 codon in the P site. Chemical structure of antibiotics is shown, C3 cladinose sugar of ERY and AZI being highlighted. See also Supplementary Fig. 3. b In vivo induction of msrD(1:3):yfp by various PTC/NPET targeting antibiotics. Bacteria containing pMMB-msrDL-msrD(1:3):yfp were grown for 17 h in the presence of 1 mM IPTG, in the absence (gray histograms) or in the presence of 50 nM antibiotics (red histograms). c Toeprinting assay depleted of release factors was performed in the absence of ribosome (line 1), in the presence of 50 µM RTP to assess start codon (line 2), without or with 50 µM ERY (line 3 and 4), without or with 50 µM ERY then supplemented with 100 µM puromycin (line 5 and 6), without or with 50 µM ERY in the presence of RF1/RF2/RF3 (line 7 and 8). The schematic indicates position of toeprint signal on the synthetic mRNA, P site codon of MsrDL-SRC is underlined. See also Supplementary Fig. 3. d Effects of msrDL variants on the expression of msrD(1:3):yfp. Bacteria were grown during 17 h in the presence of 1 mM IPTG, in the absence (gray histograms) or in the presence of 100 nM ERY (red histograms). Square boxes show fold of induction. e Toeprinting assay performed on the MsrDLWT, MsrDLL3A and MsrDLI4A constructs in the absence or presence of 50 µM ERY or 100 µM puromycin. Open arrow indicates the initiation codon. Black arrows indicate ribosomal stalling, with the M6 codon in the P site. f Toeprinting assay performed on the MsrDL7A-iso construct in the absence or presence of ERY. Addition of a sense codon after M6 codon lead to translational arrest with M6 codon in the P site (black arrows) and A7 codon in the A site in the presence of ERY. A faint toeprint was also observed with A7 codon in the P site (gray arrows) and the stop codon in the A site. b, c Error bars represent mean ± s.d. for triplicate experiments and the p values were determined by unpaired two-sided t-test without adjustment. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. MsrDL is a macrolide-sensing nascent chain that stalls the ribosome. a Toeprinting assay of msrDL in the absence (-) or in the presence of 50 µM of various macrolide antibiotics. White arrow indicates initiation codon. Black arrows indicate ribosome stalling, with M6 codon in the P site. Chemical structure of antibiotics is shown, C3 cladinose sugar of ERY and AZI being highlighted. See also Supplementary Fig. 3. b In vivo induction of msrD(1:3):yfp by various PTC/NPET targeting antibiotics. Bacteria containing pMMB-msrDL-msrD(1:3):yfp were grown for 17 h in the presence of 1 mM IPTG, in the absence (gray histograms) or in the presence of 50 nM antibiotics (red histograms). c Toeprinting assay depleted of release factors was performed in the absence of ribosome (line 1), in the presence of 50 µM RTP to assess start codon (line 2), without or with 50 µM ERY (line 3 and 4), without or with 50 µM ERY then supplemented with 100 µM puromycin (line 5 and 6), without or with 50 µM ERY in the presence of RF1/RF2/RF3 (line 7 and 8). The schematic indicates position of toeprint signal on the synthetic mRNA, P site codon of MsrDL-SRC is underlined. See also Supplementary Fig. 3. d Effects of msrDL variants on the expression of msrD(1:3):yfp. Bacteria were grown during 17 h in the presence of 1 mM IPTG, in the absence (gray histograms) or in the presence of 100 nM ERY (red histograms). Square boxes show fold of induction. e Toeprinting assay performed on the MsrDLWT, MsrDLL3A and MsrDLI4A constructs in the absence or presence of 50 µM ERY or 100 µM puromycin. Open arrow indicates the initiation codon. Black arrows indicate ribosomal stalling, with the M6 codon in the P site. f Toeprinting assay performed on the MsrDL7A-iso construct in the absence or presence of ERY. Addition of a sense codon after M6 codon lead to translational arrest with M6 codon in the P site (black arrows) and A7 codon in the A site in the presence of ERY. A faint toeprint was also observed with A7 codon in the P site (gray arrows) and the stop codon in the A site. b, c Error bars represent mean ± s.d. for triplicate experiments and the p values were determined by unpaired two-sided t-test without adjustment. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. We used an inhibitor of the first peptide bond formation, which allows the identification of an ORF’s start codon55, to further characterize the translation of msrDL mRNA. We showed that in presence of 50 µM RTP, a clear toeprint can be observed (Fig. 3c). This toeprint corresponds to a stalled ribosome displaying the initiation codon in its ribosomal P site, which confirms that these ribosomes can initiate msrDL translation. The toeprint observed at positions +31, +32 and +33 relative to msrDL 5’ end (Fig. 3a, c) in presence of ERY and AZI indicates SRC formation located at the termination step of MsrDL synthesis with the C-terminal methionine (M6) codon in the P site and an UAA stop codon in the A site. In accordance with this, reactions that are depleted of release factors (RF1, RF2, RF3) (Fig. 3c) showed the same toeprint results. Moreover, the addition of puromycin led to the loss of this toeprint signal, while preserving it in the presence of ERY (Fig. 3c). Puromycin is an aminonucleoside antibiotic mimicking an A site substrate tyrosyl-tRNA and causing premature chain termination. While actively translating ribosomes are sensitive to this antibiotic, stalled ones tend to be refractory15,16,20,56,57. The resistance of MsrDL-SRC to puromycin is consistent with an ERY-sensing NC that leads to PTC silencing and stalling. In consequence, the stalled ribosome on msrDL covers the first half of the hairpin of the RIT and therefore prevents its formation and transcription termination (Fig. 3c and Supplementary Fig. 3c). The main dissimilarity between tested macrolides resides in the presence or absence of a cladinose moiety on C3 of the macrocyclic lactone ring which appeared to be critical for MsrDL-SRC formation (Fig. 3a) similarly to ErmCL20. Absence of significant toeprint in the presence of TEL (whose C3 cladinose sugar is replaced by a keto group) suggested that msrDL is translated efficiently without stalling. TYL and SPI differ from the other macrolides by the presence of disaccharide mycaminose-mycarose in place of the C5 monosaccharide desosamine. When bound to the ribosome, this extended sugar moiety protrudes into the PTC of the ribosome58. Absence of intermediate toeprint and increase of the toeprint corresponding to initiation complex in the presence of these two drugs imply that these antibiotics stabilize the initiation complex. Previous results58–60 have shown that they inhibit the formation of the peptide bond, our results suggest that it occurs mainly for the first peptide bond formation (Fig. 3a). We replace individually each amino acid of MsrDL sequence by an alanine to investigate the importance of each residue and its ability to induce the msrD(1-3):yfp reporter, which indirectly reports the formation of an ERY-dependent SRC (Fig. 3d). The scan showed a strong reduction of inducibility for all the mutated residues with the exception of residue Y2 (Fig. 3d). Since MsrDL is a short hexapeptide, it is very likely that most of the residues would have certain importance in maintain the conformation that is able to sense ERY. A complete loss of inducibility was observed when the residues L3 and I4 were replaced by alanine, suggesting that these two residues are directly involved in drug-sensing. Toeprinting assays conducted on these two constructs showed that both have less MsrDL-SRC formation in the presence of ERY and the stalled complexes were not resistant to puromycin (Fig. 3e). The importance of these two residues were structurally confirmed and is detailed in the next section. Considering that MsrDL inhibits the action of both RF1 and RF2 in the presence of ERY, we mutated UAA stop codon into RF1-specific UAG and RF2-specific UGA stop codons to investigate a putative preferential inhibition as previously shown for TnaC61. Mutation of UAA into UAG or UGA reduced the level of inducibility of the reporter gene (Supplementary Fig. 2d) demonstrating the importance of the stop codon. This observation was corroborated by our phylogenetic analysis, which revealed a large prevalence of UAA stop codon among the different msrDL variants (Supplementary fig. 2a). Most likely the UAA stop codon has been selected by evolution to maximize msrD expression in the presence of an inducer. We designed a construct of MsrDLWT reporter where the codons of msrDL were replaced by synonymous codons, as described in the Methods section. This construct, MsrDLWT-iso, showed a reduction of the yfp expression, possibly due to the lack of NusG pausing site, but the regulation is mostly preserved (Fig. 3d). Therefore, the amino acid composition of the peptide is responsible for the translational stalling. Addition of an extra alanine before the stop codon in the MsrDL7A-iso construct reduced the regulatory potential of the leader peptide (Fig. 3d). Toeprinting assay revealed that this construct has two stalling positions: one occurs with the additional A7 codon in the ribosomal A site and the second with the stop codon in the A site (Fig. 3f). Thus, MsrDL peptide seems to induce efficient ribosomal stalling by preventing elongation and termination. The MsrDL7A-iso construct showed less induction of the yfp reporter by ERY compared to MsrDLWT-iso construct (Fig. 3d) suggesting that when inhibition of elongation and termination does not occur at the same location, the regulation is less efficient. Molecular mechanism of ribosome stalling by MsrDL To understand how MsrDL inhibits translation termination in the presence of ERY, a synthetic mRNA containing a single msrDL copy was translated in vitro with purified E. coli DB10 ribosomes in the presence of ERY (as described in Supplementary Fig. 4a) and the resulting sample was subjected to cryo-EM. After image processing and particle images sorting two nearly identical subclasses were obtained and refined, one containing only a P-site tRNAs and one containing P- and E-site tRNAs (11% and 28.1% of total particles, respectively), as described in Methods and in Supplementary Fig. 4b. However, the ribosome (observed in the non-rotated state) and the MsrDL peptide conformations in both classes are identical, therefore they were merged together in order to improve the final resolution. The resulting initial map of the 70 S ribosome (EMD-13805) with an average resolution of 3.0 Å that was subjected to multibody refinement, generating reconstructions for the body and the head of the small subunit (EMD-13807 and EMD-13808) and the large subunit (EMD-13806), presenting average resolutions of 3.08, 3.3 and 2.97 Å, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 4b, 4c and Supplementary Table 2). The resolutions of the derived reconstructions were consistent with unambiguous assignment of ribosomal proteins side chains, rRNA nucleotides and some post-transcriptional modifications (Supplementary Fig. 4d–4f). The local resolution of the codon-anticodon allowed unambiguous identification of the P-site tRNA as an elongator MettRNAMet (Supplementary Fig. 4e), which was also confirmed by the presence of distinctive elements such as N4-acetylcytidine at position 34 (ac4C34) and N6-threonylcarbamoyladenosine at position 37 (t6A37) (Supplementary Fig. 4e, f)62,63, consistent with the toeprint results which assigned the M6 codon in the P site and the UAA stop codon in the A site (Fig. 3c). A clear density corresponding to an ERY molecule bound in its canonical position was found at the entrance of the NPET (Fig. 4a, b and Supplementary Fig. 4d), allowing attribution of macrocyclic lactone ring, cladinose and desosamine sugars. A continuous density at the 3’ end of the P-site tRNA extending within the entrance of the ribosome tunnel was identified as MsrDL-NC and the local resolution of ~3 Å allowed modeling of the peptide de novo (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Fig. 4d). The leader peptide adopted a hook-like shape with its N-terminal extremity protruding into a cavity at the entrance of the tunnel delimited by 23 S rRNA nucleotides U2584, U2586, G2608 and C2610 (Fig. 4b). One noticeable feature of MsrDL interaction with the ribosome is its residue Y2 that forces the base U2584 to bulge out and Y2 forms a π-stacking with the base G2583 (Fig. 4c, d) in place of U2584. This unique interaction should stabilize the peptide conformation, while it appears structurally significant, it is not strictly essential, since replacement of the Y2 by an alanine reduces the induction of the reporter gene by less than 50% (Fig. 3d). In addition, this residue is substituted in some MsrDL variants (Supplementary Fig. 2a). MsrDL did not show numerous significant electrostatic interactions with the ribosome, since it is mostly composed of hydrophobic amino acids. It is likely stabilized by hydrophobic interactions.Fig. 4Structure of MsrDL-SRC.a Transverse section of the cryo-EM map showing the 30 S (gray) and 50 S (white) ribosomal subunits, mRNA (purple), ERY (red) and MsrDL-NC (gold) bound to P-site tRNAMet (beige). b Close-up of MsrDL-NC within ribosomal tunnel showing experimental density and modeled structure, colored as Fig. 4a while 23 S rRNA nucleotides are shown in light gray. c, d Presence of MsrDL residue Y2 displace nucleotide U2584 out of its position when compared to RF1- (PDB 5J30, light blue) and RF2-containing (PDB 5CZP, blue) termination complex, thus forming a π-stacking with G258364. e Conformation of U2584 and U2585 prevented productive accommodation of RF1 (PDB 5J30, light blue) and RF2 (PDB 5CZP, blue) while catalytic methylated glutamine clashed with MsrDL residue F564. f PTC in MsrDL-SRC (light gray) is stabilized in an uninduced state (PDB 1VQ6, pink) rather than in an induced state (PDB 1VQN, green) as U2585 is pushed back by MsrDL residue Y265. g–i Molecular basis for C3 cladinose sugar recognition by MsrDL. Residue L3 at proximity of cladinose sugar while residue I4 at proximity of desosamine sugar. TEL lacking cladinose sugar and failing to form MsrDL-SRC has been aligned (PDB 4V7S)76. j Presence of residue I4 avoided rotation of A2062 to form an Hoogsteen base pairing with m2A2503 as is the case for ErmCL-SRC (PDB 3J7Z, green)12. Light blue dashed lines indicate hydrogen bonds formed by Hoogsteen base pairing. For the whole figure, structures were aligned on domain V of 23 S rRNA. Spheres represent van der Waals radii. Fig. 4Structure of MsrDL-SRC.a Transverse section of the cryo-EM map showing the 30 S (gray) and 50 S (white) ribosomal subunits, mRNA (purple), ERY (red) and MsrDL-NC (gold) bound to P-site tRNAMet (beige). b Close-up of MsrDL-NC within ribosomal tunnel showing experimental density and modeled structure, colored as Fig. 4a while 23 S rRNA nucleotides are shown in light gray. c, d Presence of MsrDL residue Y2 displace nucleotide U2584 out of its position when compared to RF1- (PDB 5J30, light blue) and RF2-containing (PDB 5CZP, blue) termination complex, thus forming a π-stacking with G258364. e Conformation of U2584 and U2585 prevented productive accommodation of RF1 (PDB 5J30, light blue) and RF2 (PDB 5CZP, blue) while catalytic methylated glutamine clashed with MsrDL residue F564. f PTC in MsrDL-SRC (light gray) is stabilized in an uninduced state (PDB 1VQ6, pink) rather than in an induced state (PDB 1VQN, green) as U2585 is pushed back by MsrDL residue Y265. g–i Molecular basis for C3 cladinose sugar recognition by MsrDL. Residue L3 at proximity of cladinose sugar while residue I4 at proximity of desosamine sugar. TEL lacking cladinose sugar and failing to form MsrDL-SRC has been aligned (PDB 4V7S)76. j Presence of residue I4 avoided rotation of A2062 to form an Hoogsteen base pairing with m2A2503 as is the case for ErmCL-SRC (PDB 3J7Z, green)12. Light blue dashed lines indicate hydrogen bonds formed by Hoogsteen base pairing. For the whole figure, structures were aligned on domain V of 23 S rRNA. Spheres represent van der Waals radii. Structure of MsrDL-SRC. a Transverse section of the cryo-EM map showing the 30 S (gray) and 50 S (white) ribosomal subunits, mRNA (purple), ERY (red) and MsrDL-NC (gold) bound to P-site tRNAMet (beige). b Close-up of MsrDL-NC within ribosomal tunnel showing experimental density and modeled structure, colored as Fig. 4a while 23 S rRNA nucleotides are shown in light gray. c, d Presence of MsrDL residue Y2 displace nucleotide U2584 out of its position when compared to RF1- (PDB 5J30, light blue) and RF2-containing (PDB 5CZP, blue) termination complex, thus forming a π-stacking with G258364. e Conformation of U2584 and U2585 prevented productive accommodation of RF1 (PDB 5J30, light blue) and RF2 (PDB 5CZP, blue) while catalytic methylated glutamine clashed with MsrDL residue F564. f PTC in MsrDL-SRC (light gray) is stabilized in an uninduced state (PDB 1VQ6, pink) rather than in an induced state (PDB 1VQN, green) as U2585 is pushed back by MsrDL residue Y265. g–i Molecular basis for C3 cladinose sugar recognition by MsrDL. Residue L3 at proximity of cladinose sugar while residue I4 at proximity of desosamine sugar. TEL lacking cladinose sugar and failing to form MsrDL-SRC has been aligned (PDB 4V7S)76. j Presence of residue I4 avoided rotation of A2062 to form an Hoogsteen base pairing with m2A2503 as is the case for ErmCL-SRC (PDB 3J7Z, green)12. Light blue dashed lines indicate hydrogen bonds formed by Hoogsteen base pairing. For the whole figure, structures were aligned on domain V of 23 S rRNA. Spheres represent van der Waals radii. Our biochemical investigations showed that the MsrDL-SRC was formed due to hampered translation termination on the UAA stop codon. This stop codon is recognized by both RF1 and RF2, which subsequently catalyze peptide hydrolysis via their conserved GGQ motif protruding within the PTC. Structural alignment of our atomic model to RF1- and RF2-containing ribosome structures64 revealed that proper accommodation of the RFs is prevented by steric clashes of the methylated glutamine and the glycines of the GGQ motif against the residue F5 of MsrDL and 23 S rRNA bases U2584 and U2585, respectively (Fig. 4e). The conformation of MsrDL peptide stabilized the PTC in an uninduced conformation65 which prevents the opening of the active site necessary for peptide bond formation and hydrolysis (Fig. 4f). This observation suggests that the MsrDL-SRC cannot catalyze peptide bond formation, as confirmed by the toeprinting performed on the MsrDL7A-iso construct (Fig. 3e). Structural alignment of the MsrDL-SRC with ErmBL- and ErmCL-SRCs demonstrated that 23 S rRNA nucleotides U2506 and U2585 are not in the same conformation (Supplementary Fig. 5a, b). These bases in MsrDL-SRC adapt a conformation similar to ErmDL-, SpeFL- and TnaC(R23F)-SRCs (Supplementary Fig. 5c–e)12–16. However, the unusual position of base U2584 seems to be a unique feature of MsrDL-SRC. Our in vivo and in vitro experiments demonstrated that the MsrDL monitors the presence of cladinose-containing drugs. Residues L3 and I4 being critical for drug recognition and/or conformation of the peptide (Fig. 3d, e). Accordingly, in our atomic model we identified residue L3 as the closest amino acid to the cladinose moiety and residue I4 as the closest to the desosamine moiety of the ERY molecule (Fig. 4b, g). However, similarly to ErmBL, no close contact between the nascent chain and the drug was observed13,66. The residue L3 being ~3.8 Å away from cladinose sugar and the residue I4 being ~3.9 Å away from desosamine sugar, consistent with a hydrophobic interaction between MsrDL and the drug (Fig. 4g–i). This observation is also in accordance with previous descriptions of pentapeptides conferring ERY resistance in which the presence of a leucine or isoleucine at position 3 was critical for drug recognition67,68. Moreover, the importance of 23 S rRNA residue A2062 acting as an ERY-sensor and contributing in silencing the PTC, has been demonstrated for some regulatory leader peptides69,70. In the case of ErmCL, the critical feature for macrolide-dependent stalling is the rotation of the base A2062 that forms an Hoogsteen base pairing with m2A250312,69,70. The structure of the MsrDL-SRC showed that residue I4 restrains rotation of base A2062 (Fig. 4j). Therefore, MsrDL induces an A2062/m2A2503-independent ribosome stalling70. The path of MsrDL-NC within the ribosomal tunnel contrasts with all previous descriptions of elongating polypeptides (Figs. 4b and 5). Indeed, ERY-sensing ErmBL, ErmCL and ErmDL leader peptides12–14 engage in the NPET and bypass the tunnel-bound drug, while MsrDL curves before encountering it and then engages into a dead-end crevice at the entrance of the NPET (Figs. 4b and 5b). The same observation (Fig. 5c) can be made with metabolite-sensing SpeFL/TnaC(R23F) leader peptides15,16, which avoid the crevice and enter the NPET. The first methionine of MsrDL-NC latches into the dead-end crevice, which is delimited by 23 S rRNA nucleotides U2584, U2586, G2608 and C2610 (Fig. 5a–c). This crevice located at the base of helix 93 (h93) is part of domain V of 23 S rRNA and is conserved from bacteria to human (mitoribosome and cytosolic ribosome) (Fig. 5d, Supplementary Fig. 5f and 5g). We termed it “proximal crevice”.Fig. 5MsrDL engages in a conserved crevice at the NPET entrance.a Secondary structure of the E. coli 23 S rRNA domain V showing location of the proximal crevice at the base of h93. For the whole figure, nucleotides delimitating proximal crevice are shown in red. b, c Comparison of MsrDL path (gold) with ERY-dependent leader peptides ErmBL (PDB 5JTE, blue), ErmCL (PDB 3J7Z, green), ErmDL (PDB 7NSO, teal) as well as L-ornithine-sensing SpeFL (PDB 6TC3, pink) and L-tryptophan-sensing TnaC(R23F) (PDB 7O1A, purple)12–16. See also Supplementary Fig. 5a–e. d Proximal crevice in domain V is conserved from bacteria to human (MsrDL-SRC, gray; S. aureus PDB 6YEF, light green; H. sapiens 55 S mitoribosome PDB 7A5F, light blue; H. sapiens 80 S ribosome PDB 6OLI, marine blue)93–95. See also Supplementary Fig. 5g and h. For the whole figure, atomic model of MsrDL is shown with its experimental density. Structures were aligned on domain V of 23 S rRNA. Fig. 5MsrDL engages in a conserved crevice at the NPET entrance.a Secondary structure of the E. coli 23 S rRNA domain V showing location of the proximal crevice at the base of h93. For the whole figure, nucleotides delimitating proximal crevice are shown in red. b, c Comparison of MsrDL path (gold) with ERY-dependent leader peptides ErmBL (PDB 5JTE, blue), ErmCL (PDB 3J7Z, green), ErmDL (PDB 7NSO, teal) as well as L-ornithine-sensing SpeFL (PDB 6TC3, pink) and L-tryptophan-sensing TnaC(R23F) (PDB 7O1A, purple)12–16. See also Supplementary Fig. 5a–e. d Proximal crevice in domain V is conserved from bacteria to human (MsrDL-SRC, gray; S. aureus PDB 6YEF, light green; H. sapiens 55 S mitoribosome PDB 7A5F, light blue; H. sapiens 80 S ribosome PDB 6OLI, marine blue)93–95. See also Supplementary Fig. 5g and h. For the whole figure, atomic model of MsrDL is shown with its experimental density. Structures were aligned on domain V of 23 S rRNA. MsrDL engages in a conserved crevice at the NPET entrance. a Secondary structure of the E. coli 23 S rRNA domain V showing location of the proximal crevice at the base of h93. For the whole figure, nucleotides delimitating proximal crevice are shown in red. b, c Comparison of MsrDL path (gold) with ERY-dependent leader peptides ErmBL (PDB 5JTE, blue), ErmCL (PDB 3J7Z, green), ErmDL (PDB 7NSO, teal) as well as L-ornithine-sensing SpeFL (PDB 6TC3, pink) and L-tryptophan-sensing TnaC(R23F) (PDB 7O1A, purple)12–16. See also Supplementary Fig. 5a–e. d Proximal crevice in domain V is conserved from bacteria to human (MsrDL-SRC, gray; S. aureus PDB 6YEF, light green; H. sapiens 55 S mitoribosome PDB 7A5F, light blue; H. sapiens 80 S ribosome PDB 6OLI, marine blue)93–95. See also Supplementary Fig. 5g and h. For the whole figure, atomic model of MsrDL is shown with its experimental density. Structures were aligned on domain V of 23 S rRNA. MsrD negatively regulates its own expression The protein MsrD provides antibiotic resistance by interacting with antibiotic-stalled ribosome while msrDL translation in the presence of ERY leads to the formation of a SRC. If MsrD is also able to rescue this SRC, it will repress its own expression and form a feedback loop similar to the ARE ABC-F Vga(A)71. We tested this hypothesis by using an E. coli DB10 strain double transformed with pMMB-msrDL-msrD(1-3):yfp and the compatible pBAD plasmid expressing various msrD variants. Strains were grown in the presence of 300 nM of ERY with their optical density and fluorescence monitored (Fig. 6a and Supplementary Fig. 6). The strain carrying the pBAD-Control showed a high fluorescence and a low OD600 as observed in Fig. 2a, reflecting an induction of the reporter and a susceptibility to ERY. On the contrary, expression of msrDWT led to a higher cell growth and a stronger reduction of fluorescence, which correspond respectively to antibiotic resistance and a repression of the expression of the reporter. These results support a model where MsrDWT can rescue MsrDL-SRC and therefore alleviate the RIT-mediated repression on the msrD transcription.Fig. 6MsrD negatively regulates its own synthesis upon erythromycin exposure.a Effects of MsrD variants on MsrDL. E. coli DB10 containing pMMB-msrDL-msrD(1-3):yfp and expressing various msrD mutants were grown in the presence of 0.2 % L-Arabinose, 1 mM IPTG and 300 nM ERY, both OD600 and fluorescence being recorded over 24 h. Fluorescence was plotted against OD600, error bars for both axes represent mean ± s.d. for triplicate experiments. Color code is same as Fig. 1c. Light green rectangle indicates bacterial growth over control plasmid. b Model of MsrD regulating its own expression and providing antibiotic resistance. The presence of a NusG-dependent pause site might stall the RNAP and explains why the system works in bacteria where transcription and translation are not so tightly coupled. In the absence of ERY, RNAP dropped off at Rho-independent transcription terminator. In the presence of ERY, the ribosome following the RNAP (presumably paused) stalled and unwound the terminator leading to msrD transcription. Once translated, MsrD negatively regulates its own expression on one side, and provides antibiotic resistance on the other side. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Fig. 6MsrD negatively regulates its own synthesis upon erythromycin exposure.a Effects of MsrD variants on MsrDL. E. coli DB10 containing pMMB-msrDL-msrD(1-3):yfp and expressing various msrD mutants were grown in the presence of 0.2 % L-Arabinose, 1 mM IPTG and 300 nM ERY, both OD600 and fluorescence being recorded over 24 h. Fluorescence was plotted against OD600, error bars for both axes represent mean ± s.d. for triplicate experiments. Color code is same as Fig. 1c. Light green rectangle indicates bacterial growth over control plasmid. b Model of MsrD regulating its own expression and providing antibiotic resistance. The presence of a NusG-dependent pause site might stall the RNAP and explains why the system works in bacteria where transcription and translation are not so tightly coupled. In the absence of ERY, RNAP dropped off at Rho-independent transcription terminator. In the presence of ERY, the ribosome following the RNAP (presumably paused) stalled and unwound the terminator leading to msrD transcription. Once translated, MsrD negatively regulates its own expression on one side, and provides antibiotic resistance on the other side. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. MsrD negatively regulates its own synthesis upon erythromycin exposure. a Effects of MsrD variants on MsrDL. E. coli DB10 containing pMMB-msrDL-msrD(1-3):yfp and expressing various msrD mutants were grown in the presence of 0.2 % L-Arabinose, 1 mM IPTG and 300 nM ERY, both OD600 and fluorescence being recorded over 24 h. Fluorescence was plotted against OD600, error bars for both axes represent mean ± s.d. for triplicate experiments. Color code is same as Fig. 1c. Light green rectangle indicates bacterial growth over control plasmid. b Model of MsrD regulating its own expression and providing antibiotic resistance. The presence of a NusG-dependent pause site might stall the RNAP and explains why the system works in bacteria where transcription and translation are not so tightly coupled. In the absence of ERY, RNAP dropped off at Rho-independent transcription terminator. In the presence of ERY, the ribosome following the RNAP (presumably paused) stalled and unwound the terminator leading to msrD transcription. Once translated, MsrD negatively regulates its own expression on one side, and provides antibiotic resistance on the other side. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. The strain expressing msrDE125Q had a low ERY resistance (Fig. 1c). When it was co-transformed with the pMMB-msrDL-msrD(1-3):yfp plasmid, no resistance was observed, possibly because the presence of the two plasmids created some toxicity. Overall, the results showed that MsrD variants which lost the ability to provide antibiotic resistance (∆PtIM, ∆Loop and ATPase deficient mutants) also lost the ability to rescue MsrDL-SRC (Fig. 6a and Supplementary Fig. 6). Point mutations in the Loop of the PtIM indicated some discrepancy between antibiotic resistance phenotype and MsrDL-SRC rescue. All the mutants showed an intermediary phenotype with less antibiotic resistance and less repression of the reporter compared to MsrD. The mutant MsrDH244w had the same repression effect on the reporter as MsrDH244A for an equivalent OD600, but it provided more than 3 times less antibiotic resistance (Figs. 1c and 6a). The mutant MsrDR241A provides a resistance close to MsrD, but does not rescue the MsrDL-SRC as efficiently as the latter one (Figs. 1c and 6a). Mutants MsrDL242A and MsrDH244A provided similar resistance, but MsrDH244A conferred a stronger repression of the reporter (Figs. 1c and 6a). Together these observations demonstrate that the determinants of the dual function of MsrD in conferring antibiotic resistance and rescuing MsrDL-SRC are overall similar.