Results Chromosome-Level Genomes Respectively, 359 (120 ×) and 195 Gb (89 ×) long reads (PacBio) were generated to assemble a 3 and 2.2 Gb draft genomes of M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma, falling within the size range of other neogastropod genomes (table 1) and significantly higher than other Caenogastropoda, Patellogastropoda, Neomphalina, and Vetigastropoda genomes available to date (supplementary table S1, Supplementary Material online). We used the Dovetail Omni-C method to achieve chromosome-level assemblies for both species, resulting in 35 pseudochromosomes each. No previous report was available in the literature on the karyotype of Tonnoidea species, including M. corrugatus, whereas only 36 karyotypes have been described for neogastropod species, none of them being S. haemastoma (supplementary table S2, Supplementary Material online). Among the species belonging to the Muricidae family (which includes S. haemastoma), most have 35 chromosomes (12 species over a total of 21, see supplementary table S2, Supplementary Material online). Actually, most of the neogastropods possess between 30 and 43 chromosomes, with the exception of Strigatella litterata, Nucella lapillus, and Myurella nebulosa (n = 19, 14–16, and 17, respectively). The single chromosome-level neogastropod genome (of the 7 available; see supplementary table S1, Supplementary Material online), from C. ventricosus (Pardos-Blas et al. 2021), also presented 35 assembled pseudochromosomes, congruently with our results (supplementary table S2, Supplementary Material online). Assembly and Annotation Statistics of Monoplex corrugatus, Stramonita haemastoma (from This Study) Compared with Conus ventricosus, Pomacea canaliculata, and Achatina fulica. Species Assembly Length (Gb) N50 Mb (L50) BUSCO Score on Assembly GC Content (%) Number of Protein-Coding Genes Exons/cds Introns/CDS CDS Length Exon Length Intron Length BUSCO Score on Annotation. Monoplex

corrugatus 3.075 86.8 (15) C: 91.4%(S: 84.6%, D: 6.8%) 41 36,924 4.1 3.1 1,128 281 1,621 C: 83.6%(S: 83.3%, D: 0.3%). Stramonita

haemastoma 2.236 58.4 (16) C: 89.1%(S: 83.8%, D: 5.3%) 42 34,865 4.8 3.8 1,141 243 1,229 C: 78.7%(S: 77.1%, D: 1.6%). Conus

ventricosus 3.592 93.5 (16) C: 84.7%(S: 81.8%, D: 2.9%) 43 31,591 4.6 3.6 1,126 246 1,603 C: 32.2%(S: 31.6%, D: 0.6%). Pomacea

canaliculata 0.447 32.6 (6) C: 97.3%(S: 96.5%, D: 0.8%) 39 18,265 9.3 8.3 1,671 263 1,542 C: 89.1%(S: 88.4%, D: 0.7%). Achatina

fulica 1.856 59.6 (13) C: 93.4%(S: 87.7%, D: 5.7%) 39 23,726 7.1 6.1 1,559 271 3,793 C: 89.8%(S: 82.9%, D: 6.9%). Note.—N50 values are in Mega base, BUSCO score column reports complete BUSCO sequences (C) number, that is the sum of single BUSCO sequences (S) and duplicated BUSCO sequences (D). We retrieved an N50 value of 87 Mb for M. corrugatus and 58 Mb for S. haemastoma (table 1) indicating a high contiguity of the assemblies when compared for example with C. tribblei with a N50 value of 2.7 Kb. In total, 91% and 89% metazoan BUSCO genes, respectively, were found in these assemblies, indicating a valuable completeness of the genomes, even higher than that obtained for C. ventricosus (84.7%). When looking at single genes only (supplementary table S1, Supplementary Material online), found in the assemblies using BUSCO, the values are similar to C. ventricosus (82%, 84%, and 85% in C. ventricosus, S. haemastoma, and M. corrugatus, respectively), whereas duplicated genes number doubles in M. corrugatus (7%) and S. haemastoma (5%) compared with C. ventricosus (3%). This might indicate a higher purge of genes after the WGD in C. ventricosus than in M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma. After masking repeated elements, representing 61% and 40% of each genome, respectively, we predicted 36,924 and 34,865 protein-coding genes (table 1 and supplementary table S1, Supplementary Material online for more details). The global statistics of the annotations were similar to C. ventricosus, including the number of predicted genes which is, however, slightly higher than what has been reported in the other caenogastropods (e.g., in C. ventricosus or Batillaria attramentaria) and significantly higher than in P. canaliculata (2 and 1.8 times higher for M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma, respectively). The average number of exons per coding sequence (CDS), number of introns per CDS, and CDS length were lower in M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma compared with P. canaliculata and other Ampullarioidea (table 1). We also observed a higher proportion of CDS in our genomes, with CDS BUSCO scores of 84% and 79%, respectively, compared with the reported score of 32% for C. ventricosus, which could be attributed in part to sequencing errors for the C. ventricosus genome, as the sequencing depth was of 54X only (table 1; Pardos-Blas et al. 2021). Duplication Events in Neogastropoda and Tonnoidea We detected paralogous genes in M. corrugatus, S. haemastoma, C. ventricosus, and P. canaliculata using the best reciprocal hit (BRH) method, as well as orthologs shared between species pairs (fig. 1). We plotted the distribution of the identity percent for each comparison of the orthologs between the four species and found that orthologs between M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma had higher median and average identity percent than orthologs between C. ventricosus and the two other species M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma (supplementary fig. S1, Supplementary Material online). Fig. 1.Schematic representation of the phylogenetic relationships between the species compared in this study. Simplified tree of the four Caenogastropoda species studied in this work. Numbers for each pair correspond to the number of orthologs detected between the two species (top) and the number of syntenic regions detected between the two genomes, all chromosomes considered (bottom). The three first pictures credits: MNHN CC BY 4.0. The picture of P. canaliculata was taken from Ng et al. 2017. Schematic representation of the phylogenetic relationships between the species compared in this study. Simplified tree of the four Caenogastropoda species studied in this work. Numbers for each pair correspond to the number of orthologs detected between the two species (top) and the number of syntenic regions detected between the two genomes, all chromosomes considered (bottom). The three first pictures credits: MNHN CC BY 4.0. The picture of P. canaliculata was taken from Ng et al. 2017. To further detect duplication events, we searched for conserved synteny among the chromosome-level assemblies and compared them with P. canaliculata (fig. 2). MCScanX detected collinear orthologs (called segmental) in each pairwise comparison (see numbers on fig. 1). Among these species, almost all pseudochromosomes of each species had homologous regions detected in the two other species; for example, all pseudochromosomes numbered 1 (largest pseudochromosomes of M. corrugatus, S. haemastoma and C. ventricosus) matched each other's, with some translocation events in pseudochromosomes 2 or 3 (fig. 2). More interestingly, each of P. canaliculata pseudochromosomes displayed synteny with more than one pseudochromosome in C. ventricosus, S. haemastoma, and M. corrugatus but the chromosome 14. For example, syntenic blocks of P. canaliculata pseudochromosome 7 were retrieved in pseudochromosomes 1 and 2 in M. corrugatus, 1 and 3 in S. haemastoma, and 1 and 2 in C. ventricosus; pseudochromosome 3 had syntenic blocks occurring in pseudochromosomes 6, 10, 19, and 24 in M. corrugatus, 6, 11, 21, and 22 in S. haemastoma and 7, 8, 20, and 22 in C. ventricosus. In summary, ten pseudochromosomes of P. canaliculata had homologous regions in exactly two pseudochromosomes of C. ventricosus, S. haemastoma, and M. corrugatus, and three pseudochromosomes had homologous regions in exactly four pseudochromosomes of C. ventricosus, S. haemastoma, and M. corrugatus. Genes found in chromosome 14 of P. canaliculata (990 annotated genes) had 136, 140, and 122 orthologs in M. corrugatus, S. haemastoma, and C. ventricosus, respectively. Although syntenic blocks were not conserved in this chromosome, most of the orthologs were found in the pseudochromosomes 29 and 34 of M. corrugatus, in the pseudochromosomes 24 and 31 of S. haemastoma, and in the pseudochromosomes 32 and 34 of C. ventricosus, all pseudochromosomes which had none or very few syntenic blocks (fig. 2). Although a strong synteny was found between each of these species' pseudochromosomes (fig. 2), very few syntenic blocks were detected among the homologous pseudochromosomes within a species (supplementary fig. S2, Supplementary Material online). This is in contrast to Achatina fulica (Liu et al. 2021), where synteny is strongly conserved between homologous pseudochromosomes within the species. Fig. 2.Syntenic blocks in Caenogastropoda. Representation of the pseudochromosomes (black and gray rectangles with their pseudochromosome numbers) of the four Caenogastropoda generated using Synvisio (Bandi and Gutwin 2020). Each line represents a syntenic block in reverse or in forward orientation. Only links between side-by-side species are represented by full lines, whereas the dotted lines represent links between not juxtaposed species (no synteny detected between the two juxtaposed pseudochromosomes). Syntenic blocks in Caenogastropoda. Representation of the pseudochromosomes (black and gray rectangles with their pseudochromosome numbers) of the four Caenogastropoda generated using Synvisio (Bandi and Gutwin 2020). Each line represents a syntenic block in reverse or in forward orientation. Only links between side-by-side species are represented by full lines, whereas the dotted lines represent links between not juxtaposed species (no synteny detected between the two juxtaposed pseudochromosomes). To further validate the presence of a putative WGD as suggested by our results, showing a higher number of pseudochromosomes in Neogastropoda and in closely related Caenogastropoda, and in agreement with reported chromosome counts retrieved from the previously published in the relevant literature (supplementary table S2, Supplementary Material online), we employed an independent approach based on the analysis of the number of Ks (synonymous substitutions) between paralogs within a genome. This approach is used to estimate the timing of gene duplication events by comparing the number of synonymous substitutions between paralogs (synonymous divergence) to estimate the time since the gene duplication event occurred (Van de Peer et al. 2009). Synonymous substitutions, which are changes in the DNA sequence that do not result in a change in the amino acid sequence of the protein, are used because they are less likely to be affected by natural selection than nonsynonymous substitutions, which do change the amino acid sequence of the protein. Here, the distribution of Ks between all paralogous genes in each of the neogastropods and M. corrugatus (fig. 3B) showed a first high peak corresponding to recent events of duplication as very few substitutions were detected. As very few genes were conserved between two putative homologous pseudochromosomes (ohnologs, see fig. 3A) in M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma, we plotted the distribution of Ks between orthologs in a pairwise comparison (fig. 3B) to identify in which order the events occurred. Three peaks were detected, where the first peak appears for paralogous genes in each of the three species, the second one for the paralog and ortholog genes within and between the three species, and the third one for the orthologs between P. canaliculata and each of the three species. Fig. 3.(A) Orthologs, paralogs, and ohnologs. The rectangle on a line represents a gene on a chromosome. Lines from species 1 to species 2 identify orthologs; the upper curved line defines paralogs (in tandem on the same chromosome); the lower curved line identify ohnologs (in two homologous chromosomes within a single species). (B) Ks density plot. Distribution of synonymous divergence between pairs of paralogs (first three lines, Conus, Monoplex and Stramonita) and orthologs (for all remaining lines). The first peak represents the newest events of duplication of each species (Conus ventricosus, Monoplex corrugatus, and Stramonita haemastoma); the middle peak corresponds to the whole genome duplication event; and the third peak represents the point of divergence between P. canaliculata and the three other species. (A) Orthologs, paralogs, and ohnologs. The rectangle on a line represents a gene on a chromosome. Lines from species 1 to species 2 identify orthologs; the upper curved line defines paralogs (in tandem on the same chromosome); the lower curved line identify ohnologs (in two homologous chromosomes within a single species). (B) Ks density plot. Distribution of synonymous divergence between pairs of paralogs (first three lines, Conus, Monoplex and Stramonita) and orthologs (for all remaining lines). The first peak represents the newest events of duplication of each species (Conus ventricosus, Monoplex corrugatus, and Stramonita haemastoma); the middle peak corresponds to the whole genome duplication event; and the third peak represents the point of divergence between P. canaliculata and the three other species. Homeobox Genes Homeobox genes are involved in the early stages of embryonic development (Gehring et al. 1994). For our target species, no RNAseq data of development stages from previous studies were available yet, and thus the automatic gene annotation failed to detect them. Therefore, we manually annotated them, not only in the two genomes generated in this study but also in other genomes (P. canaliculata, Chrysomallon squamiferum, Haliotis rubra, Lottia gigantea, and Pecten maximus) for which homeobox genes were not annotated yet. These new annotations showed that the early diverged gastropods Ch. squamiferum, H. rubra, L. gigantea, and the bivalve P. maximus had exactly one cluster of homeobox genes with the same order on specific superscaffolds/pseudochromosomes. Anterior group genes (Ant, Lox) are placed on the same superscaffold/pseudochromosome and are followed by posterior group genes, whereas parahox genes (Xlox, Gsx, and Cdx genes) are found on a separate superscaffold/pseudochromosome (fig. 4). Neither A. fulica nor C. ventricosus homeobox genes were reannotated here (since already described in Liu et al. 2021 and Pardos-Blas et al. 2021), but both show a duplication of homeobox components on two different pseudochromosomes. Although A. fulica shows a duplication of a part of the anterior group genes (Lox5, Antp, Lox4, and Lox2), Hox1 and 5 in addition to Lox2 and Lox4 were also found as duplicated in C. ventricosus. Beside this duplication, C. ventricosus genes are arranged in a similar order as in P. canaliculata and opposed to A. fulica: posterior group genes are in between two types of anterior group genes in C. ventricosus, whereas anterior group genes are clustered together and followed by the posterior group genes in A. fulica. In M. corrugatus, most genes were found duplicated (we could not detect Hox4 and Post1 in Scaffold_30) and arranged in a different order when comparing each hox cluster in this species genome. Fewer genes were found duplicated in hox cluster in S. haemastoma (we could not find Lox5, Antp, Lox4, and Lox2 in Scaffold_28), but we found three tandem duplication events (for Hox4 in scaffold_23 and Hox1 and Post2 in Scaffold_28). Interestingly, in addition to the two copies of Hox5, we also detected a homeobox gene closely related to Hox5 in both M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma (see fig. 4A, “Hox5-like” in S. haemastoma and M. corrugatus). Our annotated homeobox genes were further verified with a phylogenetic analysis, in which orthologous genes of a given group are clustered together (fig. 4B). Fig. 4.Hox genes clusters. (A) Representation of the gene order of Hox genes; colored boxes with the arrow indicating the gene direction on the pseudochromosome (Chr) or superscaffold (Sc) represented by a line, as detected during the annotation. Star marks species for which data were retrieved from literature (Liu et al. 2020; Pardos-Blas et al. 2021). (B) Tree representing the phylogenetic relationships between all the sequences of the analysis; color dots correspond to the species as listed on the (A) part of the figure. Hox genes clusters. (A) Representation of the gene order of Hox genes; colored boxes with the arrow indicating the gene direction on the pseudochromosome (Chr) or superscaffold (Sc) represented by a line, as detected during the annotation. Star marks species for which data were retrieved from literature (Liu et al. 2020; Pardos-Blas et al. 2021). (B) Tree representing the phylogenetic relationships between all the sequences of the analysis; color dots correspond to the species as listed on the (A) part of the figure. Putative Toxins Found within Syntenic Blocks To target toxin-coding genes potentially resulting from a post-WGD sub or neofunctionalization, we focused on the genes found in syntenic blocks with P. canaliculata. From the 166 and 130 putative toxin genes annotated using the in-house toxin database (see Materials and Methods and supplementary table S3, Supplementary Material online) in M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma, respectively, 16 and 5 genes were found in syntenic blocks in M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma, respectively (table 2). From the 16 M. corrugatus genes, two were discarded as they could not be reliably identified as toxins or toxin-related genes. Then, for each of the 14 remaining genes, we searched for their putative orthologs in S. haemastoma (if not already found in the toxin annotation results) and in P. canaliculata, as well as for the possible paralogs in the homologous pseudochromosome of M. corrugatus (as defined by the P. canaliculata synteny, fig. 2; see Materials and Methods). Finally, 12 groups of genes related to toxins were analyzed in more details (table 2). Toxins and Related Genes Detected in Syntenic Blocks in Monoplex corrugatus, Stramonita haemastoma, and Pomacea canaliculata. Group Nb Genes Per Species Description of the Best Match against NR Putative Function. 1 2 M. corrugatus2 S. haemastoma Allatotropin-1 precursor (Charonia tritonis) Conotoxin. 1 P. canaliculata Hypothetical protein (P. canaliculata). 2 2 M. corrugatus2 S. haemastoma Hypothetical protein BaRGS_000210 (Batillaria attramentaria) Enzyme toxin. 1 P. canaliculata Zinc metalloproteinase nas-13-like (P. canaliculata). 3 8 M. corrugatus Chitinase-like lectin, partial (Crepidula fornicata) Chitinase: enzyme/toxin. 3 S. haemastoma Probable chitinase 10 (P. canaliculata). 3 P. canaliculata Probable chitinase 10 (P. canaliculata). 4 2 M. corrugatus Conotoxin precursor conkunitzin (Conus ebraeus) Toxin. 2 S. haemastoma Conotoxin superfamily conkunitzin-8 (C. magus). 1 P. canaliculata Hypothetical protein (P. canaliculata). 5 1 M. corrugatus Kunitz-type peptide 1 (Bitis atropos) Toxin. 1 S. haemastoma Carboxypeptidase inhibitor SmCI-like isoform X2 (Limulus polyphemus). 6 2 M. corrugatus2 S. haemastoma1 P. canaliculata FMRFamide precursor (Ch. tritonis) Neurotrasmitter/toxin. 7 1 M. corrugatus1 S. haemastoma1 P. canaliculata Lysosomal alpha-mannosidase-like (P. canaliculata) Enzyme for PTM: N-linked glycosylation, often present in venom. 8 4 M. corrugatus3 S. haemastoma Protein disulfide isomerase (C. vexillum) Enzyme involved in toxin folding, often present in venom. 2 P. canaliculata Protein disulfide-isomerase-like isoform X1 (P. canaliculata). 9 1 M. corrugatus1 S. haemastoma1 P. canaliculata conopressin/conophysin (Haliclona caerulea) Neurotransmitter/toxin. 10 2 M. corrugatus1 S. haemastoma CCAP-1 precursor (Ch. tritonis) Toxin. 1 P. canaliculata ConoCAP-like (P. canaliculata). 11 3 M. corrugatus2 S. haemastoma1 P. canaliculata Probable serine carboxypeptidase CPVL (P. canaliculata) Enzyme toxin. 12 2 M. corrugatus2 S. haemastoma Achatin-2 precursor (Ch. tritonis) Neuropeptide, maybe a toxin?. 1 P. canaliculata Uncharacterized protein (P. canaliculata). Note.—See supplementary table S3, Supplementary Material online for more details. In most cases, we found at least one copy in each species but for the group 5, where the P. canaliculata orthologous gene was not detected (table 2). The groups 5, 7, and 9 had exactly one copy in each genome: we could not detect a second copy in the other pseudochromosomes. Genes from group 5 are probable Kunitz domain toxins; group 7 are probable enzyme responsible for posttranscriptional modification (PTM enzyme) known to be related to toxins (Soares and Oliveira 2009), whereas group 9 are probable neurotransmitters. The groups 1, 2, 4, 6, and 12 had all exactly two copies in M. corrugatus and S. haemastoma genomes, in homologous pseudochromosomes. All genes from group 1 had the best matches with allatotropin precursor genes (Gruber and Muttenthaler 2012) except for P. canaliculata gene, which had the best match with itself as it was already been annotated in NR as “hypothetical protein C0Q70_00675.” Genes from group 2 had best matches with portions of three genes, which are functionally annotated differently, but all had an astacin domain. This domain is common in venom metalloprotease toxins from different organisms (Trevisan-Silva et al. 2010; Ponce et al. 2016; Gerdol et al. 2019). All genes from group 4 had matches with conkunitzin-M16 that encode for Kv channels-blocking conotoxins (Finol-Urdaneta et al. 2020). However, the sequence from P. canaliculata was annotated as “hypothetical protein C0Q70_05870”. Genes from group 6 had all their best matches with a FMRFamide precursor from Charonia tritonis, a neurotransmitter whose function is unknown but is highly conserved through molluscs (Klein et al. 2021). Finally, genes from group 12 were annotated as neuropeptide as they had all their best matches with sequences annotated as precursor of achatin, a neuromodulator described in A. fulica (Liu and Takeuchi 1993), except for P. canaliculata in which the function is unknown (“uncharacterized protein LOC112557935”). For the group 10, we found two gene copies in M. corrugatus on the respective homologous pseudochromosomes, whereas only one copy was found in S. haemastoma. Group 10 genes had hits with precursors of ConoCAP, a cardioactive neuropeptide from cone snails (Möller et al. 2010), where the copies in the homologous pseudochromosomes in M. corrugatus are similar, but the only copy found in S. haemastoma did not conserve an open reading frame in the genome and had no hits in NR database. The group 11 included duplicated genes in the pseudochromosome 3 of M. corrugatus, whereas no other copies were detected in the other pseudochromosomes, similarly to S. haemastoma having two copies in the same pseudochromosome 2. They were all annotated as probable serine carboxypeptidase CPVL, known as main enzyme acting in blood digestion (Motobu et al. 2007). Finally, groups 3 and 8 had more than two copies in each of the three species where group 3 is a member of the chitinase gene family and group 8 of the thioredoxin gene family. As an illustration, we choose to highlight group 4 sequences, closely related to conotoxin, and group 1 by representing the syntenic blocks where it was found (fig. 5A) and the multiple alignment of their sequences with conotoxin sequences from C. betulinus and C. magus for group 4 sequences (fig. 5B). Fig. 5.Synteny block and multiple alignment of toxins similar to conotoxins. (A) Representation of syntenic blocks (light shadow) on each superscaffold/pseudochromosome and each species with putative toxins from group 4 (A1) and 1 (A2). Each horizontal line of a superscaffold/pseudochromosome represents one species. Red blocks are the detected toxins, black blocks are the genes found in the syntenic region, and green blocks are ortholog genes found in synteny (indicated by green lines). A toxin from group 1 found in Monoplex corrugatus (scaffold 2) was found in synteny with Pomacea canaliculata in a region that also shares a syntenic block with scaffold 1 of M. corrugatus close to the region of the paralog toxin. (B) Multiple alignment of group 4 (B1) and group 1 (B2) sequences (supplementary table S3, Supplementary Material online) manually annotated and found in a syntenic block with the addition of two conotoxins from Conus betulinus and C. magus, generated using MUSCLE v.3.8 (Edgar 2004). Synteny block and multiple alignment of toxins similar to conotoxins. (A) Representation of syntenic blocks (light shadow) on each superscaffold/pseudochromosome and each species with putative toxins from group 4 (A1) and 1 (A2). Each horizontal line of a superscaffold/pseudochromosome represents one species. Red blocks are the detected toxins, black blocks are the genes found in the syntenic region, and green blocks are ortholog genes found in synteny (indicated by green lines). A toxin from group 1 found in Monoplex corrugatus (scaffold 2) was found in synteny with Pomacea canaliculata in a region that also shares a syntenic block with scaffold 1 of M. corrugatus close to the region of the paralog toxin. (B) Multiple alignment of group 4 (B1) and group 1 (B2) sequences (supplementary table S3, Supplementary Material online) manually annotated and found in a syntenic block with the addition of two conotoxins from Conus betulinus and C. magus, generated using MUSCLE v.3.8 (Edgar 2004). Differential Gene Expression in the Neogastropoda To assess the evolutionary origin of Neogastropoda genes, we performed differential gene expression on S. haemastoma transcriptomes. We sequenced three replicates for two tissues, the osphradium and the salivary glands, retrieving a total of 6,412 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the two tissues, 2,439 of which were up-regulated in the salivary gland. We also realigned the DEGs on the genome of S. haemastoma to detect potential ohnolog genes not previously found in our annotation. For most of the genes (66% and 61%) that were up- and down-regulated, we did not detect a paralog in the whole genome (table 3). For others, we found duplicates in the homologous chromosome (ohnologs). Although the majority of ohnologs had no differential expression, most of the ones found to be differentially expressed had similar expression pattern, that is both copies were either up- or downregulated. Few of the ohnolog copies had opposite expression profiles. Numbers of Differentially Expressed Genes and Their Copies in the Genome. Upregulated Genes Downregulated Genes. Total number of DEG 2,439 3,973. Number of copies found per DEG 1,611 2,410. Total copies found as ohnologsExpression of the copies:up | down | not DEG 26762 (1) | 26 | 179 37619 | 102 (2) | 255. Note.—Up and downregulated in salivary gland compared with osphradium tissues. Numbers between parenthesis in table line “Expression of the copies” are the predicted toxin-coding genes. Among the toxins found in the genomes and described in table 2, only three pairs of ohnologs were found differentially expressed (supplementary table S3, Supplementary Material online). The two copies of the genes of S. haemastoma in groups 1 and 6 were both downregulated, and the two copies of genes from group 8 were both upregulated in the salivary glands.