Results Isolation and molecular analysis of claR gene Total DNA was isolated from Streptomyces and
subjected to gel electrophoresis to analyze the concentration
and purity. The pure, isolated total DNA
was used for PCR reactions. Two different sets of
primers were used. The claR gene was successfully
amplified by using the claR2 primer set(Fig 2). The isolated fragment had to be studied in more
detail to further compare it with the original claR
of S. clavuligerus DSM738. Two different strategies
were conducted to not only confirm the amplified
fragment as claR gene, but to also compare it
with the claR gene sequence from S. clavuligerus
DSM738. Initially nested PCR, using the claR1
primer set, confirmed the existence of claR gene
(data not shown). Fig 2Amplification of claR with its native promoterfrom
S. clavuligerus PTCC 1705 by PCR. I. S. clavuligerus total genomic DNA (isolated either
from DSM738 or PTCC 1705) was used in the
PCR reaction. The numbers are in base pair (bp), II.
PTCC1705, III. DSM738, M. Marker; GeneRulerTM
1kb DNA ladder. Amplification of claR with its native promoterfrom
S. clavuligerus PTCC 1705 by PCR. I. S. clavuligerus total genomic DNA (isolated either
from DSM738 or PTCC 1705) was used in the
PCR reaction. The numbers are in base pair (bp), II.
PTCC1705, III. DSM738, M. Marker; GeneRulerTM
1kb DNA ladder. On the other hand, the results of the nested PCR have
confirmed the approximate similarity between these
two genes (claR isolated from Iranian S. clavuligerus
and S. clavuligerus DSM738). This conclusion
was achieved because the claR sequence of S. clavuligerus
DSM738 had been used to design the primers.
RFLP- PCR was then carried out using the SalI
restriction enzyme. SalI cuts the claR gene at 740 and
1331 bp, producing three fragments, 740, 591 and
338 bp. The resultant fragments confirmed the correct
structure for the isolated claR gene(Fig 3). Fig 3Molecular study of the claR, using restriction digestion
analysis. PCR amplified claR was cut with different
restriction enzymes. The results are visualized by gel electrophoresis
(2%). The numbers are in bp. I. Cut with XbaI: This enzyme does not cut the claR fragment,
II. Cut with SalI: This enzyme cuts the claR at two sites 740
and 1331 (leaving three fragments, 740 bp, 591 bp and 338 bp),
M. Marker; GeneRulerTM 100 bp DNA Ladder Plus. Molecular study of the claR, using restriction digestion
analysis. PCR amplified claR was cut with different
restriction enzymes. The results are visualized by gel electrophoresis
(2%). The numbers are in bp. I. Cut with XbaI: This enzyme does not cut the claR fragment,
II. Cut with SalI: This enzyme cuts the claR at two sites 740
and 1331 (leaving three fragments, 740 bp, 591 bp and 338 bp),
M. Marker; GeneRulerTM 100 bp DNA Ladder Plus. Sequencing analysis of the claR gene revealed
that the claR gene was amplified and sub-cloned,
free from any mutation that was also essential for
the correct expression of the gene. Bioinformatics
analysis determined the complete similarity
between the isolated claR of the Iranian strain S.
clavuligerus and S. clavuligerus 738(Fig 4). Fig 4Structural analysis of the cloned claR, isolated from
S. clavuligerus PTCC 1705. The start codon (ATG) of the
claR gene has been shown here along with a few initial sequences
related to amino acids E, V, A, and R. Not all the sequences
have been shown Structural analysis of the cloned claR, isolated from
S. clavuligerus PTCC 1705. The start codon (ATG) of the
claR gene has been shown here along with a few initial sequences
related to amino acids E, V, A, and R. Not all the sequences
have been shown The sequence of the claR gene from S. clavuligerus
PTCC 1705 was determined for the first time in this
study and will be submitted to the DDBJ/EMBL/
GenBank databases in the near future. Cloning of the claR gene E. coli XL1-Blue was transformed with pBS plasmid.
The pBs plasmid was then isolated from the
transformed E. coli and subjected to double digestion
(with BamHI and ClaI), gel electrophoresis,
and gel purification. The PCR amplified fragment
was also double digested with BamHI and ClaI,
and the resultant cut fragment was purified by gel
electrophoresis. A ligation mixture was set up using
the double digested vector and the claR gene.
 E. coli XL1-Blue competent cells were transformed
using 10 µl of the ligation mixture. About
20 colonies were observed on each plate, which
was inoculated with 100 µl of the transformed
cells of E. coli XL1-Blue. Therefore, the recombinant plasmid was isolated
from a transformed colony. Molecular studies
were then conducted on a 4581 bp new construct
named pZSclaR(Fig 5).
The isolated plasmid
was subjected to gel electrophoresis for initial
confirmation of the size of the constructed vector
(Fig 6) . pZSclaR was then cut with BamHI and ClaI for
further confirmation of its structure and the resultant
fragments were separated and visualized by gel
electrophoresis. Fig5A physical map of the vector pZSclaR, 4581 bp. This
plasmid map was drawn using computer software Clone
Manager 6 A physical map of the vector pZSclaR, 4581 bp. This
plasmid map was drawn using computer software Clone
Manager 6 Fig 6Structural confirmation of the pZSclaR using restriction
digestion analysis. The pZSclaR plasmid was subjected
to double digestion with BamHI and ClaI. The cut
fragments were subjected to gel electrophoresis (0.7% ).
Numbers are in bp. I. pZSclaR plasmid (uncut: 4581 bp), II. pZSclaR plasmid
cut with BamHI and ClaI, M. Marker Gene Ruler™ 1kb
DNA Ladder. Structural confirmation of the pZSclaR using restriction
digestion analysis. The pZSclaR plasmid was subjected
to double digestion with BamHI and ClaI. The cut
fragments were subjected to gel electrophoresis (0.7% ).
Numbers are in bp. I. pZSclaR plasmid (uncut: 4581 bp), II. pZSclaR plasmid
cut with BamHI and ClaI, M. Marker Gene Ruler™ 1kb
DNA Ladder. These two enzymes cut the pZSclaR plasmid
(4581) and separated the claR gene (1650 bp) from
the original vector (pBs; 2931 bp). pZSclaR was
then used as the PCR template in a PCR reaction
containing nested primers that could confirm the
existence of the claR gene. Therefore the correct
recombinant plasmid did exist in the recombinant
strain of E. coli.