RESULTS Identification of an essential resistance protein Orf1 in the azinomycin B producer S. sahachiroi The involvement of specific genes in antibiotic biosynthetic gene clusters is commonly confirmed by gene inactivation. Owing to lack of candidates for self-resistance and regulation within the published azinomycin B biosynthetic gene cluster, the orf1 gene adjacent to its right boundary was investigated in our study. All attempts to disrupt orf1 in the azinomycin B producer S. sahachiroi ATCC33158 failed, whereas deletion of native orf1 was achieved by double-crossover homologous recombination after a second copy of the gene had been introduced into the chromosome at a different location (Supplementary Figure S2). The orf1 gene proved to be essential for the wild type strain. However, it became easy to eliminate orf1 when the azinomycin B biosynthetic pathway was abolished by knockout of the key biosynthetic gene aziU3 (20) (Supplementary Figure S2). Obviously, the essential nature of orf1 is closely bound to production of azinomycin B. Compared to the original strain ΔaziU3, the orf1 deletion mutant strain ΔaziU3Δorf1 exhibited increased sensitivity to azinomycin B (Figure 1A). The difference in azinomycin sensitivity of ΔaziU3 and ΔaziU3Δorf1 supports Orf1 as an azinomycin resistance determinant. Figure 1.Azinomycin resistance of the orf1 deletion mutant and heterologous expression strains. (A) Azinomycin resistance detection of ΔaziU3 (right) and ΔaziU3Δorf1 (left) with increasing concentrations of azinomycin B. (B) Disc diffusion test assay to detect azinomycin resistance of S. albus::orf1 (right) and S. albus::pWS052 (left). I, 10 μl of methanol (control); II, 10 μl of 0.15 mM azinomycin B dissolved in methanol. (C) Cross streak method assay to detect azinomycin resistance conferred by Orf1 in S. albus (up) and S. lividans TK24 (down). The vertical lines are the azinomycin B producing strain ATCC33158 (2) and the mutant strain ΔaziU3 (1) without production of azinomycin B. The horizontal lines are the tested strains. Azinomycin resistance of the orf1 deletion mutant and heterologous expression strains. (A) Azinomycin resistance detection of ΔaziU3 (right) and ΔaziU3Δorf1 (left) with increasing concentrations of azinomycin B. (B) Disc diffusion test assay to detect azinomycin resistance of S. albus::orf1 (right) and S. albus::pWS052 (left). I, 10 μl of methanol (control); II, 10 μl of 0.15 mM azinomycin B dissolved in methanol. (C) Cross streak method assay to detect azinomycin resistance conferred by Orf1 in S. albus (up) and S. lividans TK24 (down). The vertical lines are the azinomycin B producing strain ATCC33158 (2) and the mutant strain ΔaziU3 (1) without production of azinomycin B. The horizontal lines are the tested strains. To further confirm the function of orf1, heterologous expression of this gene in two sensitive strains, Streptomyces albus and Streptomyces lividans, was pursued. The orf1 gene was cloned into the vector pWS052 under the control of a constitutive promoter PermE*, and introduced into two sensitive strains to give the mutant strains S. albus::orf1 and S. lividans::orf1, respectively. We used two different methods to examine the ability of orf1 to confer resistance against azinomycin B. In cross streak method (Figure 1C), the inhibition distances between the strains expressing Orf1 and the wild type strain ATCC33158 were significantly smaller than those of the negative control strains containing the vector pWS052 alone. No antagonistic effect was found between the test strains and the non-azinomycin-producing strain ΔaziU3. In disc diffusion test (Figure 1B), the strains expressing Orf1, likewise, exhibited apparent increase in resistance to azinomycin B. In these studies, we observed Orf1 consistently conferring azinomycin resistance in both native and sensitive strains. Bioinformatics analyses indicated that Orf1 is a novel, putative DNA binding protein BLASTP analysis showed that Orf1 belongs to the DUF1006 family of conserved bacterial proteins with unknown functions. This family has recently been reclassified as the HTH_42 superfamily (PF06224) by the Pfam protein families database. The helix-turn-helix (HTH) is a major structural motif capable of binding DNA and usually found in many regulator proteins (25). The HTH_42 represents a novel DNA-binding domain possibly containing two copies of winged helix-turn-helix motifs. So far, neither precise structure nor definite function for a protein in this family has been published. In Pfam database, the HTH_42 superfamily consisted of about 1653 unique proteins (derived from 1193 species) with six different domain architectures (Figure 2A). Most of proteins (1582 sequences) contain just one HTH_42 domain, while only 3 proteins have two truncated HTH_42. The remaining 68 sequences including other types of protein domains were proposed to be related to ATP-dependent helicases. The domain architecture of Orf1 belongs to the first group, of which 48 sequences were annotated as putative uncharacterized YcaQ protein. In E. coli strain K12, the YcaQ was identified as one of UVC-toxicity modulating proteins with an unknown role (26). It is worth noting that 31 of these putative YcaQ proteins are from common pathogens in Enterobacteriaceae and 3 come from antibiotic producers. These data coincide with the distribution that HTH_42 proteins are primarily found in species of Salmonella (causes typhoid fever), Escherichia (Gut flora, some strains cause intestinal infection) and Streptomyces (produce antibiotics) (Figure 2B). Statistically, pathogenic bacteria and antibiotic-producing bacteria hold a high percentage in sequences occupancy (37% and 21%, respectively) (Figure 2C). Extremophiles and tolerant bacteria as well as nitrogen-fixing bacteria also share a proportion of HTH_42 proteins. It seems that members of HTH_42 superfamily play a certain role in some bacteria that could escape the unfavorable conditions. Figure 2.Bioinformatics analyses of Orf1. (A) Typical domain organization of HTH_42 superfamily (PF06224) proteins. The Orf1 protein belongs to the first domain architecture which contains only one HTH_42. (B) The primary species distribution of the PF06224 family is presented in a pie chart. (C) The pie chart displays the percentage of protein sequences from species with specific functional categories. Bioinformatics analyses of Orf1. (A) Typical domain organization of HTH_42 superfamily (PF06224) proteins. The Orf1 protein belongs to the first domain architecture which contains only one HTH_42. (B) The primary species distribution of the PF06224 family is presented in a pie chart. (C) The pie chart displays the percentage of protein sequences from species with specific functional categories. Additionally, PSI-BLAST (one interation) on the non-redundant protein database identified 17 homologous proteins with concrete descriptions. Besides two winged-helix DNA-binding domain proteins, other proteins were all annotated as prevent-host-death proteins, sharing low sequence identity (average 23%) and similarity (average 39%) with Orf1. These homologous proteins as well as Orf1 are essential for the vitality of their hosts. The comprehensive bioinformatics analyses proposed Orf1 to be a novel putative DNA binding protein only, but no hint of its mechanism in azinomycin B resistance was found. Orf1 binds sequence nonspecifically to native DNA and structure-specifically to azinomycin B-modified sites Based on bioinformatics results, Orf1 was initially suspected to be a transcriptional regulator controlling expression of antibiotic resistance genes. Therefore, electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) experiments were performed to investigate the interaction between Orf1 and potential promoter regions in the azinomycin B gene cluster. Intriguingly, Orf1 was found to retard all DNA fragment migration, including non-promoter regions and sequences from another streptomycete strain used as negative controls (Supplementary Figure S3B), suggesting that Orf1 exhibits little sequence specificity in DNA binding. A representative gel shift pattern for the binding of Orf1 to a 220-bp linearized DNA is shown in Figure 3A. As protein concentration increased, Orf1 produced progressively slower DNA migration, different from the gel retardation pattern of specific interactions. This sequence-independent manner excluded the possibility of Orf1 functioning as a regulator. Figure 3.Orf1 is a non-specific DNA binding protein but specifically binds to azinomycin B-modified site. (A) DNA binding activity of Orf1 in vitro by EMSA with a biotinylated 220 bp DNA fragment. Protein concentrations were 0, 0.94, 1.88, 3.75, 7.5, 15.0 and 30 μM, respectively. Orf1-DNA complexes were subjected to electrophoresis in polyacrylamide. (B) EMSA assays for the binding of Orf1 to azinomycin B-modified DNA. A 21 bp oligodeoxynucleotide (1 μM) containing one GCC site (Supplementary Table S3) pre-treated with (right) or without (left) azinomycin B was incubated with various amounts of Orf1 protein (0, 1.12, 2.25, 4.5, 9.0 and 18 μM). The gel analysis of protein–DNA complexes were done following SYBR Gold staining. (C) ChIP assays of Orf1 and nucleic acids interactions in vivo. (i) ChIP assay in S. sahachiroi ATCC33158. ChIP using preimmune (P) or immune (I) sera raised against Orf1. (ii) ChIP assay in S. lividans::orf1 and S. lividans::pWS052. Immunoprecipitation of S. lividans::orf1 with preimmune (P) and immune (I) sera, and immunoprecipitation of S. lividans::pWS052 with immune sera (II) were detected by PCR with multiple pairs of primers. Input 1 and Input 2 were chromatin fractions without immunoprecipitation from two strains, respectively. Orf1 is a non-specific DNA binding protein but specifically binds to azinomycin B-modified site. (A) DNA binding activity of Orf1 in vitro by EMSA with a biotinylated 220 bp DNA fragment. Protein concentrations were 0, 0.94, 1.88, 3.75, 7.5, 15.0 and 30 μM, respectively. Orf1-DNA complexes were subjected to electrophoresis in polyacrylamide. (B) EMSA assays for the binding of Orf1 to azinomycin B-modified DNA. A 21 bp oligodeoxynucleotide (1 μM) containing one GCC site (Supplementary Table S3) pre-treated with (right) or without (left) azinomycin B was incubated with various amounts of Orf1 protein (0, 1.12, 2.25, 4.5, 9.0 and 18 μM). The gel analysis of protein–DNA complexes were done following SYBR Gold staining. (C) ChIP assays of Orf1 and nucleic acids interactions in vivo. (i) ChIP assay in S. sahachiroi ATCC33158. ChIP using preimmune (P) or immune (I) sera raised against Orf1. (ii) ChIP assay in S. lividans::orf1 and S. lividans::pWS052. Immunoprecipitation of S. lividans::orf1 with preimmune (P) and immune (I) sera, and immunoprecipitation of S. lividans::pWS052 with immune sera (II) were detected by PCR with multiple pairs of primers. Input 1 and Input 2 were chromatin fractions without immunoprecipitation from two strains, respectively. To further investigate if Orf1 exhibits some selectivity for 5′-GNT or 5′-GNC sequences which are target sites for azinomycin B induced cross-linking, four oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) containing GCC, GCT, GAT and AAT located within AT tracts were used for EMSA experiments. Likewise, Orf1 bound to four ODNs with no obvious difference in affinity (Supplementary Figure S3C). However, a single sharp retardation band of a site-specific protein–DNA complex appeared when the adducted ODN with a single azinomycin B cross-linking site of GCC was incubated with lower concentration of Orf1 (lanes 1–3 in Figure 3B). As protein concentration increased, the amount of the specific protein–DNA complex initially increased (lanes 1 and 2) and then decreased (lanes 3–5) due to the sequence non-specific binding of extra Orf1 to other sites. This phenomenon suggested that the binding mode of Orf1 is biphasic, with higher affinity to azinomycin B-modified sites and lower affinity to native DNA duplex. ChIP assays revealed extensive association of Orf1 with chromatin in vivo To test the binding of Orf1 to nucleic acids in physiological environment, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were carried out. In the ChIP assay, DNA recovered from immune or preimmune precipitates was amplified using primers specific for the genomic regions indicated in Supplementary Tables S4 and S5. For validating non-specific interactions between Orf1 and DNA in vivo, the amplified regions were randomly selected throughout the genome. The Orf1 produced by both the native host and one sensitive host S. lividans whose genome sequence is available, was tested for in vivo DNA binding activity using the purified antibody against Orf1. In addition to the preimmune serum being used as a control, immunoprecipitation obtained from S. lividans::pWS052 cells was used as an additional negative control for ChIP assays in S. lividans::orf1 cells. DNA corresponding to the eight randomly chosen regions in the genome of the native host or the sensitive host was co-immunoprecipitated with Orf1, while significantly reduced levels of DNA were immunoprecipitated in the negative controls (Figure 3C). The results of ChIP assays revealed an extensive association between Orf1 and chromatin in vivo. The binding of a large amount of Orf1 within the bacterial chromatin might mask target sites through protein–DNA interactions to prevent azinomycin B-induced damage. If Orf1 serves to protect chromatin against azinomycin B, it should be in abundance. Therefore, we measured cellular Orf1 levels at different stages in the life cycle of ATCC33158 by quantitative immunoblotting (Supplementary Figure S6A). In western blot analysis, expression of Orf1 was undetectable or only found in trace amounts in the early growth phase, but rose sharply after 24 h and reached a peak at 36 h. Subsequently, levels dipped slightly from 48 h to 60 h and came back up at 72 h (Supplementary Figure S6B). It is reasonable that the initial and then increasing production of Orf1 apparently preceded azinomycin B production to serve as a protector during drug production (Supplementary Figure S6C). The Orf1 protein has also been detected in mutant strains that do not accumulate azinomycin B (data not shown), which implies the orf1 gene expression is not directly induced by azinomycin B. The Orf1 (40.8 kDa) constituted ≈0.18% of the total protein levels (Supplementary Table S6). If we translated this into molecules per cell, however, there were about 106 molecules of Orf1/cell, approximately on par with the number of target sites. These findings support the plausibility of Orf1 conferring azinomycin B resistance by preventing antibiotic occupancy of the accessible target sites on chromatin in vivo. In vitro DNA protection assays demonstrated Orf1 prevents DNA from azinomycin-mediated cross-linking via direct target site protection For further confirmation, we established a series of in vitro DNA protection assays based on the cross-linking effect of the drug. The DNA interstrand cross-linking activities of azinomycin B were initially determined using the linearized plasmid pBluescript SK(+) in an agarose gel assay (Figure 4A). The linearized plasmid DNA was incubated with the drug or a control solvent prior to alkali denaturation and gel electrophoresis. ICLs induced by azinomycin B covalently link the two strands of the DNA double helix together, and hinder separation of the two strands by denaturation. Thus, native DNA exhibits a different mobility in agarose gels than cross-linked DNA after alkali treatment. DNA cross-linking assays were successfully performed under typical conditions as described previously (22–24). With increasing concentrations of azinomycin B, the amount of cross-linked double stranded DNA able to withstand alkali denaturation gradually increased (Figure 4A). In the DNA protection assay, the Orf1 protein was first bound to DNA, and then the protein–DNA complex was incubated with azinomycin B. Sufficient amount of protein was used in the test to observe protective effect. Protein–DNA complexes resisted cross-linking so that DNA was completely denatured into single strands by subsequent alkali treatment (lanes 5–8 in Figure 4B). Conversely, the amount of cross-linked double stranded DNA in the control group (without Orf1) gradually raised as azinomycin B concentrations increased (lanes 1–4 in Figure 4B). These results indicated that Orf1 protects DNA against azinomycin B mediated cross-linking. Figure 4.Characterization of the DNA glycosylase activity of Orf1 in vitro. (A) Detection of azinomycin B induced DNA cross-linking using alkali sedimentation. The linearized pBluescript SK(+) DNA was treated with 0, 25, 50, 75 and 125 μM of azinomycin B for 1 h prior to alkali denaturation and gel electrophoresis. The control of ssDNA (lane 1) was generated by alkali denaturation of the dsDNA control (lane 6). (B) Site protection effect of Orf1. The linearized pBluescript SK(+) DNA was incubated with (indicated as pr-DNA) or without (indicated as DNA ) Orf1 for 15 min and then subjected to cross-linking reaction at increasing concentrations of azinomycin B (0, 50, 100 and 150 μM). (C) Repair of DNA interstrand cross-links by Orf1. Orf1 protein was added after DNA cross-linking reaction and recovery of ssDNA was observed. (D) Cross-linking effects of the plasmid pOJ260 DNA. The supercoiled DNA pOJ260 (scDNA) containing tiny amounts of open circular DNA (ocDNA) was treated with 0, 50, 100, 200 and 400 μM of azinomycin B for 1 h at 37°C and then extracted with chloroform to eliminate the remaining drug prior to gel electrophoresis. (E) The circular DNA with different levels of cross-linking (prepared as described above) was incubated with Orf1 (30 μM) for 20 min at 30°C. DNA-bound Orf1 proteins were removed by digestion with proteinase K (1 mg/ml) for 15 min at 37°C before gel detection. (F) Repair of the highly cross-linked circular DNA by Orf1. The ICL DNA was incubated with Orf1 (63.6 μM) for 20 min at 30°C and treated with proteinase K prior to gel detection. The native circular DNA was set as a DNA control (lanes 4–6) and BSA was set as a protein control (lanes 2 and 5). (I) Repair of the highly cross-linked linear pBluescript SK(+) DNA by Orf1. (G) and (H) Products of Endo IV cleavage reaction with the Orf1 treated crosslinked circular (G) and linear (H) DNA. Characterization of the DNA glycosylase activity of Orf1 in vitro. (A) Detection of azinomycin B induced DNA cross-linking using alkali sedimentation. The linearized pBluescript SK(+) DNA was treated with 0, 25, 50, 75 and 125 μM of azinomycin B for 1 h prior to alkali denaturation and gel electrophoresis. The control of ssDNA (lane 1) was generated by alkali denaturation of the dsDNA control (lane 6). (B) Site protection effect of Orf1. The linearized pBluescript SK(+) DNA was incubated with (indicated as pr-DNA) or without (indicated as DNA ) Orf1 for 15 min and then subjected to cross-linking reaction at increasing concentrations of azinomycin B (0, 50, 100 and 150 μM). (C) Repair of DNA interstrand cross-links by Orf1. Orf1 protein was added after DNA cross-linking reaction and recovery of ssDNA was observed. (D) Cross-linking effects of the plasmid pOJ260 DNA. The supercoiled DNA pOJ260 (scDNA) containing tiny amounts of open circular DNA (ocDNA) was treated with 0, 50, 100, 200 and 400 μM of azinomycin B for 1 h at 37°C and then extracted with chloroform to eliminate the remaining drug prior to gel electrophoresis. (E) The circular DNA with different levels of cross-linking (prepared as described above) was incubated with Orf1 (30 μM) for 20 min at 30°C. DNA-bound Orf1 proteins were removed by digestion with proteinase K (1 mg/ml) for 15 min at 37°C before gel detection. (F) Repair of the highly cross-linked circular DNA by Orf1. The ICL DNA was incubated with Orf1 (63.6 μM) for 20 min at 30°C and treated with proteinase K prior to gel detection. The native circular DNA was set as a DNA control (lanes 4–6) and BSA was set as a protein control (lanes 2 and 5). (I) Repair of the highly cross-linked linear pBluescript SK(+) DNA by Orf1. (G) and (H) Products of Endo IV cleavage reaction with the Orf1 treated crosslinked circular (G) and linear (H) DNA. In order to detect the possibility of drug inactivation and sequestration by Orf1, we conducted another DNA protection experiment where the order of addition of the reagents was changed, but no concentrations where altered. The Orf1 was first incubated with a moderate amount of azinomycin B and then DNA was added. As shown in Supplementary Figure S7A, DNA was not protected from cross-linking regardless if previously sufficient amounts of Orf1 were present in the reaction, which suggested that pre-incubation with Orf1 could not affect the cross-linking activity of azinomycin B. An ultrafiltration process was also applied to detect the interaction between Orf1 and azinomycin B (Supplementary Figure S5). All filtrate separated from the Orf1/azinomycin B pre-incubation reaction using a 10 k ultrafiltration device displayed prominent and equivalent cross-linking regardless of the Orf1 protein concentration used (Supplementary Figure S5A). In contrast, cross-linked DNA decreased as the amount of drug was reduced (Supplementary Figure S5B). Taken together, it is evident that Orf1 neither inactivates nor binds azinomycin B in vitro, hence protective effect in Figure 4B was achieved because of its DNA binding ability. Orf1 initiates the repair of azinomycin B induced DNA damage by BER Orf1 binds to not only native DNA but also cross-linked DNA in the experiments (Figure 3B and Supplementary Figure S4A). The specific binding activity of Orf1 with cross-linked DNA has prompted us to detect its capacity to repair DNA damage through setting up a DNA repair assay system. Linearized plasmid pBluescript SK(+) DNA was first cross-linked by the drug at 37°C for 1 h, and then incubated with excess Orf1 at 30°C for 10 min before alkali denaturation and agarose gel analysis. As shown in Figure 4C, cross-linking was reversed by Orf1, such that DNA was denatured into single strands (lane 7), whereas the negative control without Orf1 (lane 6) maintained the double-stranded structure under alkali denaturation. The reverse cross-linking of DNA implied that Orf1 made an incision in at least one DNA strand near the ICL sites. Three possible mechanisms of ICL DNA repaired by Orf1 were schematically presented in Figure 6B. Besides direct removal of alkyl adducts, alkylation lesions are usually repaired by excision of damaged DNA regions through base excision repair (BER) or nucleotide excision repair (NER). As relatively low-molecular weight DNA was not observed during alkaline sedimentation, incision was more likely to occur between azinomycin B and the adducted nucleoside, instead of at phosphodiester backbone. To find out the pattern of incision, we initially used the supercoiled plasmid pOJ260 (scDNA) containing tiny amounts of open circular DNA (ocDNA) as a substrate in ICL DNA cleavage assays. Intercalative binding of azinomycin B to duplex DNA unwinds the double helix and relaxes the tight conformation, resulting in a slower DNA migration through a gel (27,28). As seen in Figure 4D, the rate of DNA migration was inversely proportional to the level of cross-linking. The supercoiled DNA as well as the ocDNA was progressively relaxed by increased azinomycin B and migrated in agarose gel at continuously decreasing rates. When Orf1 was supplemented, most of cross-linked DNA was repaired and exhibited the same mobility as ocDNA except a little bit left in lane 5 due to insufficiency of the repair enzyme (Figure 4E). The residual highly cross-linked DNA was also effectively converted into the similar conformation of ocDNA after incubation with a raised concentration of Orf1 (Figure 4F, lane 3), indicating that Orf1 specifically repaired the azinomycin B modified DNA. The reverse of cross-linking was protein concentration-dependent, which produced progressively faster migrating products as the Orf1 concentrations increased (Supplementary Figure S7B). It is apparent that Orf1 removed azinomycin B from the cross-linked DNA by cleavage and thus led to the rewinding of DNA. The same rewinding effects were clearly observed in the cleavage assays of the highly cross-linked linear DNA (Figure 4I and Supplementary Figure S7D). Notably, the original conformation of DNA was not completely restored by Orf1 (Supplementary Figure S7B and S7D). Although cross-linking was reversed, transformation activity of cross-linked pOJ260 DNA was not restored at all after treatment with Orf1 (data not shown). Moreover, the prolonged treatment of ICL DNA with higher concentration of Orf1 caused breaks in DNA strands (Supplementary Figure S7C, lane 5). The uncompacted conformation and easy degradation of repaired DNA suggested the cleavage sites of Orf1 were located within the DNA strands, which excluded the direct reversal and supported the BER mechanism proposed in Figure 6C. The first step of BER is catalyzed by DNA glycosylases that remove the damaged nitrogenous base to create an apurinic or apyrimidnic site (AP site). AP endonucleases specifically recognize the abasic DNA and cleave the phosphosdiester bond exclusively at the AP sites (29). Thus, we used Endonuclease IV (Endo IV), a kind of AP endonucleases to detect if depurination occurred during the DNA repair process. As seen in Figure 4G and H, Endo IV cleavage occurred massively at phosphodiester backbone of the Orf1-treated supercoiled and linear ICL DNA (lane 6), thus leading to complete DNA degradation into a smear of smaller fragments, while there was only a slight degradation in the reactions with the Orf1-untreated ICL DNA due to spontaneous depurination of N7-alkylated products (lane 5). Depurination phenomena were not detected in the control reactions with native circular and linear DNA (lane 4), although Orf1 could bind to it. This result indicated that numerous AP sites were produced by Orf1 in DNA strands of the azinomycin-DNA adducts. Orf1 removes two adducted bases in the cross-link as a novel DNA glycosylase To determine whether Orf1 hydrolyzes the glycosidic bonds of both purines that are cross-linked, 21-mer DNA duplex with one GCC site (Supplementary Table S3) was treated with azinomycin B and subjected to the cleavage reaction of Orf1 and Endo IV. As previously reported in literature (9,24,30), this triplet readily reacted with azinomycin B, giving rise to two kinds of lower-mobility products in a 20% denaturing polyacrylamide gel. One was monoalkylated intermediate which ran close to the substrate DNA, the other was cross-linked DNA at much lower mobility (lane 1 in Figure 5A). With the addition of Orf1, two kinds of modified DNA disappeared, and instead the intensity of native DNA band greatly enhanced (lane 2), which indicated that the monoalkylation and the cross-link had been successfully reversed by Orf1. The succedent treatment with Endo IV liberated smaller fragments with sizes that corresponded to two predicted split AP products (both are 9-/11-nt DNA duplexes designated as M1 and M2), and led to a drop-off in the intensity of 21-mer DNA band (lane 6). In contrast, Endo IV did not incise the modified DNA without Orf1 pretreatment (lane 5). A limited amount of smaller fragments also appeared in the absence of Endo IV (lane 2), which implied that an alkali-induced strand scission at the abasic sites happened during denaturing PAGE (also seen in Supplementary Figure S8A). To avoid the unexpected DNA strand breaks induced by alkali and observe the formation of double-stranded break (DSB) in the cross-link repair, the same DNA samples were analyzed using native PAGE again. Figure 5B showed that apparent short DNA band of expected size appeared only after sequential treatment with Orf1 and Endo IV (lane 6). For further confirmation, another 21-mer DNA duplex with different arm lengths around G-G cross-link was used in the cleavage assay. As expected, two distinct DNA duplexes (a 10-/12-nt and an 8-/10-nt) were generated (lane 6 in Supplementary Figure S8B). The results of denaturing and native PAGE analyses clearly demonstrated that Orf1 incised two adducted G bases in both strands of the cross-linked ODN. Orf1 is supposed to be a new kind of DNA glycosylases without any similarity to known DNA repair proteins, which proved to specifically recognize azinomycin B-mediated DNA crosslinks and remove the adducted bases to repair DNA damage by inducing a BER-like pathway. Figure 5.Removal of monoalkylated and cross-linked bases by Orf1 in vitro. Products of Orf1 and Endo IV cleavage reactions with the cross-linked/monoalkylated oligodeoxynucleotide (AZB ODN) were respectively detected by denaturing PAGE (A) and native PAGE (B). M1 and M2 (control DNA) were synthesized according to the predicted cleaved products in (C). Removal of monoalkylated and cross-linked bases by Orf1 in vitro. Products of Orf1 and Endo IV cleavage reactions with the cross-linked/monoalkylated oligodeoxynucleotide (AZB ODN) were respectively detected by denaturing PAGE (A) and native PAGE (B). M1 and M2 (control DNA) were synthesized according to the predicted cleaved products in (C).