Results A. balhimycina includes a VanRS homologous TCS (VnlRSAb) encoded in the balhimycin biosynthetic gene cluster In most of the antibiotic-producing bacteria, the antibiotic biosynthetic gene clusters include resistance genes. One exception is the balhimycin producer A. balhimycina. In this study, the glycopeptide resistance genes vanHAXAb are located 2 Mb apart from the balhimycin biosynthetic gene cluster. In addition, the resistance is characterized by another unusual feature: the counterpart of the well-known TCS VanRS, which is known to regulate vanHAX expression in pathogens and in S. coelicolor is encoded by genes (vnlRSAb), which are part of the biosynthetic gene cluster and are therefore not colocated with the vanHAXAb genes. VanRSSc of S. coelicolor was reported to sense glycopeptides and to activate the expression of the vanHAXSc genes.19 To elucidate the differences of the two actinomycete TCSs, we compared the AA sequence of VnlRSAb with the sequence of VanRSSc. Sequence alignment using EMBOSS stretcher39 revealed 82% sequence similarity between VnlRAb and VanRSc (Sco3590) and 73% between VnlSAb and VanSSc (Sco3589) (Fig. 1A, B). Based on the high similarity, a corresponding function of both RRs could be proposed. In S. coelicolor, VanSSc phosphorylates VanRSc at the aspartate at AA position 51. Replacement of this residue with an alanine completely destroyed the activity of VanRSc.6 It has been shown that in S. coelicolor, in the absence of vancomycin, acetylphosphate phosphorylates VanRSc, whereas VanSSc acts as a phosphatase to decrease the level of VanRSc∼P. On exposure to vancomycin, VanS activity switches from a phosphatase to a kinase and vancomycin resistance is induced.6 Furthermore, Novotna et al.42 specified a serine residue at AA position 69 important for autophosphorylation through acetyl phosphate. Sequence comparison revealed that VnlRAb contains both, a conserved aspartate at AA position 51 (D51) and a serine at AA position 69, the position that probably becomes autophosphorylated through acetyl phosphate (Fig. 1B), indicating an analogous phosphorylation pattern of VnlRAb compared with VanRSc. The RR VnlRAb does not control expression of the vanHAXAb genes in A. balhimycina In A. balhimycina, vanHAXAb expression does not depend on VnlRSAb. The deletion of vnlRAb had no effect on glycopeptide resistance and did not result in any obvious phenotype.27 This raises the interesting question on the function of this TCS in A. balhimycina. Since overexpression of RRs of two-component signal transduction systems often modulates multidrug resistance,43,44 we overexpressed vnlRAb in A. balhimycina to analyze the effects on resistance and antibiotic production. vnlRAb was cloned under the control of the constitutive promoter ermE*p into the integrative plasmid pRM4 (pRM4vnlRAb). pRM4vnlRAb was transferred into A. balhimycina WT and into the A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb mutant,27 resulting in the recombinant strains A. balhimycina [vnlRAb] and A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb [vnlRAb], respectively. The phenotypes of the recombinant strains overexpressing VnlRAb and (as a control) that of the deletion mutant A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb were compared with the WT phenotype (Fig. 2). All strains produced balhimycin at the same level (Fig. 2A). No differences in resistance against balhimycin were observed. Using a method optimized for actinomycetes,27 muropeptides from all A. balhimycina strains cultivated under balhimycin production conditions were isolated. HPLC/MS chromatograms showed the similar muropeptide composition pattern for all strains (Fig. 2B). FIG. 2.Analysis of balhimycin production, muropeptide composition, and PG precursors in A. balhimycina WT (1), A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb (2), A. balhimycina [vnlRAb] (3), and A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb [vnlRAb] (4). (A) Production of balhimycin measured by HPLC (n = 5). (B) HPLC/MS chromatogram of the muropeptides (positive mode). The first bracket embraces the peaks representing muropeptide monomers, the second the muropeptide dimers. (C) Extracted ion chromatograms of the negative mode from the PG precursors isolated from cells grown in R5 (balhimycin production) and in TSB (no balhimycin production). d-Lac, Pentapeptide precursors ending on d-Ala-d-Lac 1194 m/z at retention time ∼18 min. d-Ala, Pentapeptide precursors ending on d-Ala-d-Ala 1193 m/z at retention time ∼12 min. HPLC, high-performance liquid chromatography; MS, mass spectrometry; PG, peptidoglycan; WT, wild type. Analysis of balhimycin production, muropeptide composition, and PG precursors in A. balhimycina WT (1), A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb (2), A. balhimycina [vnlRAb] (3), and A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb [vnlRAb] (4). (A) Production of balhimycin measured by HPLC (n = 5). (B) HPLC/MS chromatogram of the muropeptides (positive mode). The first bracket embraces the peaks representing muropeptide monomers, the second the muropeptide dimers. (C) Extracted ion chromatograms of the negative mode from the PG precursors isolated from cells grown in R5 (balhimycin production) and in TSB (no balhimycin production). d-Lac, Pentapeptide precursors ending on d-Ala-d-Lac 1194 m/z at retention time ∼18 min. d-Ala, Pentapeptide precursors ending on d-Ala-d-Ala 1193 m/z at retention time ∼12 min. HPLC, high-performance liquid chromatography; MS, mass spectrometry; PG, peptidoglycan; WT, wild type. In addition to muropeptides, the PG precursors were analyzed. For this purpose, we cultivated the strains under balhimycin production conditions and conditions under which balhimycin production is disabled. Under production as well as under nonproduction conditions, A. balhimycina WT, A. balhimycina [vnlRAb], A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb, and A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb [vnlRAb] produced resistant PG precursors ending with d-Ala-d-Lac (Fig. 2C). Only A. balhimycina WT and A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb [vnlRAb] produced traces of precursors ending with d-Ala-d-Ala under nonproduction conditions (Fig. 2C). These results suggest that VnlRAb does not regulate the synthesis of resistance PG in A. balhimycina. RT-PCR analyses revealed that a vanHAXAb transcript was detectable in A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb, confirming that the expression of vanHAXAb is independent of vnlRAb (Fig. 3). FIG. 3.RT-PCR analyses of vanHAXAb and vanYAb in A. balhimycina WT, A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb, and in A. balhimycina WT overexpressing vnlRAb (WT [vnlRAb]). RNA was isolated at different time points (15/39/63 hr) from the three strains cultivated in balhimycin production medium R5. sigB: transcription of the housekeeping gene sigB. vanHAXAb and vanYAb: transcription of vanHAXAb and vanYAb. For PCR, genomic DNA (gDNA) was used as positive control. RT-PCR analyses of vanHAXAb and vanYAb in A. balhimycina WT, A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb, and in A. balhimycina WT overexpressing vnlRAb (WT [vnlRAb]). RNA was isolated at different time points (15/39/63 hr) from the three strains cultivated in balhimycin production medium R5. sigB: transcription of the housekeeping gene sigB. vanHAXAb and vanYAb: transcription of vanHAXAb and vanYAb. For PCR, genomic DNA (gDNA) was used as positive control. In A. balhimycina, sensing of glycopeptides through VnlSAb is not required for expressing the resistance genes In enterococci and in S. coelicolor, the RR VanRSc becomes phosphorylated by the HK VanSSc. To analyze whether and how VnlRAb interacts with VnlSAb, we constructed an in-frame ΔvnlSAb mutant of A. balhimycina using the inactivation plasmid pSPΔvnlSAb. This plasmid containing a 1509 bp downstream fragment and a 1579 bp upstream fragment of vnlSAb was introduced into A. balhimycina through direct transformation. Successive homologous recombination resulted in the deletion of vnlSAb. A. balhimycina ΔvnlSAb showed neither a defect in balhimycin production nor resistance toward glycopeptides. In addition, no changes in the PG precursor and in the nascent PG composition in comparison with A. balhimycina WT were observed (data not shown). These results suggested that sensing the presence of glycopeptides does not correlate with balhimycin production and glycopeptide resistance. Apparently, the expression of the vanHAXAb genes occurs independently of VnlSAb. VnlRAb is able to activate vanHAXSc transcription in S. coelicolor In silico analyses revealed similar characteristics of VnlRSAb compared with VanRSSc. However, as shown above, the VnlRSAb system in A. balhimycina, in contrast to VanRSSc in S. coelicolor, does not regulate the vanHAXAb. To clarify the contradictory findings, the genes encoding the TCS VnlRSAb as well as VnlRAb and VnlSAb individually were transferred into the S. coelicolor mutant strain, in which the vanRSSc genes were deleted,6 to elucidate the ability of VnlRAb to activate the vanHAXSc genes in the S. coelicolor mutant. vnlRSAb, vnlRAb, and vnlSAb were introduced into S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc under the control of the constitutive promoter ermEp* using the integrative plasmid pRM4vnlRAb. The growth of the recombinant strains was tested on glycopeptide-containing plates. Introduction of vnlRSAb and of vnlRAb alone into S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc resulted in balhimycin-resistant strains (Fig. 4). In contrast, expression of vnlSAb alone did not change the glycopeptide-sensitive phenotype of the S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc mutant. These results indicated that VnlRAb from A. balhimycina is able to activate the transcription of vanHAXSc in S. coelicolor M600 also in the absence of VnlSAb. Since in S. coelicolor M600 VanRSc∼P can be generated in a VanSSc-independent manner using acetylphosphate,6 we suggest a similar activation of VnlRAb in the absence of VnlSAb or VanSSc. FIG. 4.Growth and resistance of the S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc complemented with different combinations of vnlRSAb. (A) Growth on YM agar containing no antibiotic. (B) Growth on YM agar containing apramycin (100 mg/ml) (Apra 100) to prove plasmid integration. (C) Growth on YM agar containing balhimycin (10 mg/ml) (Bal 10). (D) Growth on YM agar containing teicoplanin (10 mg/ml) (Teico 10). (E) Growth on YM agar containing no antibiotic. M600, S. coelicolor M600. Growth and resistance of the S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc complemented with different combinations of vnlRSAb. (A) Growth on YM agar containing no antibiotic. (B) Growth on YM agar containing apramycin (100 mg/ml) (Apra 100) to prove plasmid integration. (C) Growth on YM agar containing balhimycin (10 mg/ml) (Bal 10). (D) Growth on YM agar containing teicoplanin (10 mg/ml) (Teico 10). (E) Growth on YM agar containing no antibiotic. M600, S. coelicolor M600. The activation of the vanHAXSc genes in the complemented S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc mutant with vnlRSAb and vnlRAb was further analyzed by RT-PCR. For this purpose, RNA was isolated from 25-hr-old liquid cultures grown without addition of any glycopeptide. A vanHAXSc transcript was detected when S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc was complemented with vnlRSAb or with vnlRAb alone. However, in S. coelicolor M600 and in the S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc mutant, transcription of the vanHAXSc failed (Fig. 5), confirming the functionality of VnlRAb as transcriptional activator in S. coelicolor. FIG. 5.RT-PCR analyses of S. coelicolor M600 and different S. coelicolor M600 mutants. RNA was isolated after 25 hr of cultivation in the absence of any glycopeptide. hrdB: transcription of the housekeeping gene hrdBSc. vanSSc, vanRSc, and vanHAXSc: transcription of vanSSc, vanRSc, and vanHAXSc. For PCR, genomic DNA (gDNA) was used as positive control. RT-PCR analyses of S. coelicolor M600 and different S. coelicolor M600 mutants. RNA was isolated after 25 hr of cultivation in the absence of any glycopeptide. hrdB: transcription of the housekeeping gene hrdBSc. vanSSc, vanRSc, and vanHAXSc: transcription of vanSSc, vanRSc, and vanHAXSc. For PCR, genomic DNA (gDNA) was used as positive control. To investigate whether transcription of the vanHAXSc genes indeed resulted in the formation of glycopeptide-resistant PG precursors, which caused the resistant phenotype, we used HPLC/MS to analyze the PG precursor composition of S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc and of S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc complemented either with vnlRSAb or vnlRAb. Complementing S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc with vnlRSAb or with vnlRAb restored the synthesis of resistant PG precursors. In the presence of balhimycin exclusively, PG precursors ending with d-Ala-d-Lac were synthesized (Fig. 6C, D). The PG precursor composition of the glycopeptide-sensitive S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc mutant was analyzed after growing the strain in the absence of balhimycin. In this mutant, only sensitive cell wall precursors ending on d-Ala-d-Ala (1193 m/z) eluting at a retention time of 10–11 min were detected (Fig. 6A). FIG. 6.Extracted ion chromatograms (negative mode) of the PG precursors isolated from cells grown in R5 medium without antibiotic or with 25 mg/ml balhimycin (bal25). M600 ΔvanRSSc: S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc; d-Lac, pentapeptide precursors ending on d-Ala-d-Lac 1194 m/z at retention time ∼18 min; d-Ala, pentapeptide precursors ending on d-Ala-d-Ala 1193 m/z at retention time ∼14 min. Extracted ion chromatograms (negative mode) of the PG precursors isolated from cells grown in R5 medium without antibiotic or with 25 mg/ml balhimycin (bal25). M600 ΔvanRSSc: S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc; d-Lac, pentapeptide precursors ending on d-Ala-d-Lac 1194 m/z at retention time ∼18 min; d-Ala, pentapeptide precursors ending on d-Ala-d-Ala 1193 m/z at retention time ∼14 min. The phosphorylation site D51 is essential for the function of VnlRAb To define the phosphorylation site of VnlRAb, D51, which was identified as a likely phosphorylation site by sequence composition (Fig. 1), was replaced by an alanine by exchanging nucleotide A to C at position 161 of vnlRAb using the recombinant PCR method. The exchange was verified by sequence analysis. The mutated gene was cloned into the integrative vector pRM4 under the control of the ermEp* promoter and introduced into S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc. The resulting recombinant strain was not able to grow in the presence of the tested glycopeptides (Fig. 4). Therefore, we propose D51 as the VnlRAb phosphorylation site. VnlRAb expands the glycopeptide resistance in S. coelicolor The glycopeptide resistance mechanism in S. coelicolor belongs to the VanB type of resistance, meaning that glycopeptide resistance can only be induced by vancomycin or vancomycin-type glycopeptides, whereas teicoplanin (a type IV glycopeptide) fails to activate resistance,42 resulting in a teicoplanin-sensitive phenotype of S. coelicolor. In contrast, A. balhimycina is resistant against vancomycin- as well as teicoplanin-type glycopeptides. To analyze whether the RR is responsible for determination of the glycopeptide resistance type, the recombinant strains S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc [vnlRSAb], S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc [vnlRAb], S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc [vnlSAb], and S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc [vnlRSAb D51A] were grown on teicoplanin-containing plates. Surprisingly, the recombinant strains (S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc [vnlRSAb], S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc [vnlRAb]) were able to grow also on teicoplanin-containing plates, whereas growth of S. coelicolor M600 WT was inhibited (Fig. 4). These results indicated that VnlRAb is able to induce teicoplanin resistance in S. coelicolor M600 by probably activating further genes required for teicoplanin resistance. VnlRAb influences antibiotic production in S. coelicolor To analyze if the heterologous expression of VnlRAb, in addition to the activation of the vanHAXSc genes, causes further (morphological) changes in S. coelicolor M600, the growth and production of actinorhodin were investigated without the addition of any antibiotic. Similar titers of spores (1.5 × 107) of S. coelicolor M600, S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc, S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc [vnlRSAb], S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc [vnlRAb], S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc [vnlSAb], and S. coelicolor ΔvanRSSc [vnlRSAb D51A] were plated on YM medium. Surprisingly, the heterologous expression of vnlRSAb or vnlRAb alone in S. coelicolor M600 ΔvanRSSc caused retardation in growth and increased actinorhodin production (Fig. 4E). These results suggested that VnlRAb is not only able to activate the vanHAXSc genes in S. coelicolor M600 and to change its glycopeptide resistance type but it also has effects on other genes in S. coelicolor M600. VnlRAb is responsible for the activation of vanYAb Heterologous expression of VnlRAb in S. coelicolor confirmed that it can take over the VanRSc function to induce the expression of the vanHAXAb genes and, in addition, can apparently induce the expression of further genes. In contrast, it is not involved in regulation of the vanHAXAb genes in A. balhimycina. Since regulatory genes are often colocalized with its target genes, we speculated that VnlRSAb might control vanYAb, which is located directly adjacent to vnlRAb and which encodes a carboxypeptidase. Previous studies showed that VanYAb cleaves the d-Ala-d-Ala dipeptide from the PG precursors, but it is not able to cleave the d-Ala-d-Lac depsipeptide.27 To investigate, whether VnlRAb regulates the expression of vanYAb, transcriptional analyses were performed. RT-PCR analyses revealed that vanYAb was only transcribed when vnlRAb was expressed under the control of the strong promoter ermE*p (Fig. 2 (A. balhimycina [vnlRAb]). In A. balhimycina WT, transcription was detectable on a low level only after 63 hr of cultivation and in the A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb mutant, vanYAb transcription was not induced at all (Fig. 2). This result was confirmed by RNA-seq analyses where we compared the transcription level of vanYAb in the A. balhimycina WT and A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb (data not shown). The transcription of vanYAb was 25-fold decreased in A. balhimycina ΔvnlRAb compared with A. balhimycina WT. We therefore concluded that the RR VnlRAb in A. balhimycina is involved in controlling the expression of resistance mediated by VanYAb.