RESULTS The Mat enzymes facilitate the formation of a granular layer on the outside of the hyphae Previous studies have shown that the mat genes are required for mycelial aggregation and pellet formation in submerged cultures of S. coelicolor and S. lividans 29. Genome annotation suggested that matB encodes an extracellular polysaccharide synthase. To shed more light on the Mat-dependent mechanism, we investigated the cell surface of S. lividans at high resolution by cryo-scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. 1). This revealed a surface layer that decorates the entire outer surface of wild-type hyphae (Fig. 1A), which was absent in the matAB null mutant (Fig. 1B). Although the Mat proteins are expressed throughout growth 30, the Mat-dependent polymer was most apparent in young mycelia. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of Tungsten acid-negative stained cells, which images electron dense polymeric surface structures, further highlighted the Mat-dependent extracellular layer decorating wild-type hyphae (Fig. 1G). Between the hyphae a deposit of extracellular matrix could also be observed by SEM (Fig. 1D). Conversely, the hyphae of the matAB double mutant have instead a smooth surface, observed both with SEM (Fig. 1B) or negative staining in the TEM (Fig. 1H). We also failed to detect any extracellular material between the hyphae of matAB mutants (Fig. 1E). The cslA null mutant retained the extracellular layer on the cell surface as well as the adhesive material between the hyphae (Fig. 1C and H), again suggesting that this EPS is produced independent of CslA. Figure 1FIGURE 1: Electron micrographs revealing at Mat-dependent extracellular matrix.Scanning electron micrographs of young vegetative mycelium (A-F) show an abundance of extracellular material covering the hyphae of wild-type S. lividans
(A) and between hyphae (D, indicated by arrow). This extracellular material was also present in the cslA null mutant (C and F, indicated by arrow), but was absent in matAB null mutants (B and E). Negatively stained hyphae with tungsten acid, specific for polymeric substances, revealed a scabrous outside coating in wild-type hyphae (G) that is absent in the mat mutant (H). All strains were grown for 8 h in TSBS media in shake flasks. FIGURE 1: Electron micrographs revealing at Mat-dependent extracellular matrix. Scanning electron micrographs of young vegetative mycelium (A-F) show an abundance of extracellular material covering the hyphae of wild-type S. lividans
(A) and between hyphae (D, indicated by arrow). This extracellular material was also present in the cslA null mutant (C and F, indicated by arrow), but was absent in matAB null mutants (B and E). Negatively stained hyphae with tungsten acid, specific for polymeric substances, revealed a scabrous outside coating in wild-type hyphae (G) that is absent in the mat mutant (H). All strains were grown for 8 h in TSBS media in shake flasks. Bioinformatic analysis of the MatA and MatB enzymes Bioinformatics analysis of MatA failed to identify known protein domains. MatB contains two functional domains, namely an intracellular glycosyltransferase type 2 (GT2) domain and an extracellular type 4 carbohydrate esterase (CE4) domain, connected by a predicted transmembrane helix. Sequences of glycosyltransferases and carbohydrate esterases were extracted from CAZy, which catalogs enzymes with characterized function, and assembled in a local database for Blast analysis. The glycosyltransferase domain of MatB returned PgaC from E. coli as the top hit (Table S1). E. coli
pgaC encodes a glycosyltransferase that synthesizes PNAG 31. The next nearest homologs were enzymes with the same function in Acinetobacter baumannii,
Staphylococcus epidermis, Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans and Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae, all with similar scores. A similar blast comparison with the MatB carbohydrate esterase domain returned PgdA (BC_3618), a peptidoglycan N-acetylglucosamine deacetylase from Bacillus cereus as nearest characterized homologue (Table S1). Other top hits include a chitin deacetylase from Caldanaerobacter subterraneus and NodB proteins from Rhizobium species, all with similar scores. Interestingly, these enzymes all act on 1,4-linked oligo-chitin like substrates, in contrast to poly-β-1,6-N-acetylglucosamine glycosyltransferases. Taken together, bioinformatics analysis predicted that MatB catalyzes the formation of a poly-N-acetylglucosamine, with either a (1,4)- or (1,6)-configuration. Figure 2FIGURE 2: Calcofluor white staining to identify β-(1,4)-glycans.S. lividans (A), and its matAB
(B) and cslA
(C) mutants were stained with calcofluor white (CFW) to identify the presence of extracellular β-(1,4)-glycans. The staining patterns indicated the presence of β-(1,4)-glycans in both the parental strain and its matAB mutant, but not in the cslA mutant. Bar, 50 µM. FIGURE 2: Calcofluor white staining to identify β-(1,4)-glycans. S. lividans (A), and its matAB
(B) and cslA
(C) mutants were stained with calcofluor white (CFW) to identify the presence of extracellular β-(1,4)-glycans. The staining patterns indicated the presence of β-(1,4)-glycans in both the parental strain and its matAB mutant, but not in the cslA mutant. Bar, 50 µM. Biosynthesis of a PNAG-like EPS by the MatA and MatB enzymes To analyze if the Mat proteins are involved in the biosynthesis of β-(1,4-) glycans, hyphae of S. lividans 66 and its matAB null mutant were stained with calcofluor white (CFW), which is specific for glycans in this configuration 32. Apical sites of both wild-type and matAB mutant cells were stained with equal efficiency (Fig. 2). This contrasts with the absence of staining in cslA null mutants, where the synthesis of β-(1,4)-glycans is impaired 2425. These data suggest that only the CslA-GlxA system, and not MatA/MatB, produces β-(1,4)-glycans in S. lividans. Figure 3FIGURE 3: Immunofluorescence micrographs of S. lividans identifying extracellular PNAG.Mycelia from 18 h old cultures of S. lividans 66 were analyzed for the presence of PNAG with the monoclonal antibody mAb F598 and secondary anti-human IgG Alexa 488 conjugate (green) (A,C,D). As controls for the specificity of the primary antibody we used mAb F429, a monoclonal antibody that binds alginate (B), and samples treated with 50 µg/ml dispersin B (C) that degrades PNAG or with 0.4 M periodate (D), which degrades β-(1,6)-glycans. To visualize the hyphae, the DNA was stained with propidium iodide (red) (E-H). Bar, 100 µm. FIGURE 3: Immunofluorescence micrographs of S. lividans identifying extracellular PNAG. Mycelia from 18 h old cultures of S. lividans 66 were analyzed for the presence of PNAG with the monoclonal antibody mAb F598 and secondary anti-human IgG Alexa 488 conjugate (green) (A,C,D). As controls for the specificity of the primary antibody we used mAb F429, a monoclonal antibody that binds alginate (B), and samples treated with 50 µg/ml dispersin B (C) that degrades PNAG or with 0.4 M periodate (D), which degrades β-(1,6)-glycans. To visualize the hyphae, the DNA was stained with propidium iodide (red) (E-H). Bar, 100 µm. To further characterize the product of MatA and MatB, we used monoclonal antibodies (mAb F598) that specifically recognize both intact and deacetylated PNAG 33. Mycelia obtained from 18 h liquid-grown cultures of S. lividans 66 were fixed in 4% PVA and incubated overnight with mAb F598. After washing and incubation with a fluorescently labeled secondary antibody conjugate, mounting fluid containing propidium iodide (PI) was added to stain the DNA and samples were then imaged with a confocal fluorescence microscope (Fig. 3). Wild-type cells were strongly stained with mAb F598, indicating the production of a PNAG-like polymer. Co-localization with the DNA stain PI suggests that most PNAG-like molecules are located within the pellet’s structure. Conversely staining with the control antibody mAb F429, which binds alginate 34, did not result in a fluorescent signal (Fig. 3B). Binding of mAb F598 could be negated by the PNAG-specific enzyme dispersin B 35 (Fig. 3C) or by the addition of periodate (Fig. 3D), which degrades 1,6-polysaccharides. Conversely, immunofluorescence microscopy of matA or matB null mutants or the matAB double mutant with the mAb F598 antibody only resulted in background fluorescence. The anti-PNAG signal was restored by the introduction of plasmid pMAT7, which expresses matAB from the strong gapA (SCO1947) promoter (Fig. 4). To link the Mat-dependent extracellular layer seen by SEM to the presence of PNAG, the mycelia were treated for 2 h with a suspension containing either chitinases, cellulases or dispersin B. Importantly, only dispersin B significantly affected EPS accumulation as visualized by SEM microscopy (Fig. S1). Taken together, these data strongly suggest that the MatAB-dependent extracellular matrix is indeed PNAG and that PNAG is not produced in the absence of MatA or MatB. Figure 4FIGURE 4: PNAG biosynthesis depends on MatA and MatB.Mycelia from 18 h liquid-grown cultures were stained with mAb F598 (green), showing PNAG-specific staining for the wild-type strain S. lividans 66, while it was absent in mutants lacking matA, matB or the matAB double mutant. Genetic complementation via introduction of pMAT7 expressing matA and matB restored PNAG formation to the matAB double mutant. To visualize the hyphae, the DNA was stained with PI (red). Colocalization of PI and mAb F598 is shown in yellow. Bar: 50 µm. FIGURE 4: PNAG biosynthesis depends on MatA and MatB. Mycelia from 18 h liquid-grown cultures were stained with mAb F598 (green), showing PNAG-specific staining for the wild-type strain S. lividans 66, while it was absent in mutants lacking matA, matB or the matAB double mutant. Genetic complementation via introduction of pMAT7 expressing matA and matB restored PNAG formation to the matAB double mutant. To visualize the hyphae, the DNA was stained with PI (red). Colocalization of PI and mAb F598 is shown in yellow. Bar: 50 µm. MatAB expression is sufficient for pellet formation As mentioned before, genomic disruption of either cslA or matB prevents pellet formation in shaken liquid-grown cultures, transforming the morphology in a strikingly similar fashion (Fig. 5A, E-F). Although the Mat-produced PNAG can be enzymatically dispersed by dispersin B (Fig. 3), addition of dispersin B to submerged grown mycelia failed to prevent pellet formation by S. lividans (Fig. 5B). Similarly, addition of cellulase, which antagonizes the cslA dependent glycan, failed to disrupt pellet formation (Fig. 5C). Simultaneous treatment with cellulases and dispersin B resulted in a slight reduction of the aggregation, reducing the average pellet size, but did not result in the dispersed morphology seen when either matB or cslA is disrupted (Fig. 5D). Interestingly, introduction of plasmid pMAT7 in the cslA mutant resulted in a pelleting phenotype, indicating that matAB expression by itself is sufficient for pellet formation (Fig. 5G). This MatAB-driven complementation of pellet formation in the cslA mutant could be readily antagonized by the addition of dispersin B, providing further evidence that production of PNAG is indeed the cause of the restored pellet formation (Fig. 5H). These data also indicate that native pellet formation, dependent on both cslA and matAB, results in a robust structure that cannot be easily antagonized by the addition of degrading enzymes, likely by making (parts) of the matrix inaccessible to the enzymes. Figure 5FIGURE 5: Effect of cellulases and dispersin B on mycelial morphology.Light micrographs show S. lividans 66 (A), S. lividans 66 treated with 2 U/ml cellulase (B), 100 µg/ml dispersin B (C) or both cellulase and dispersin B (D), the matB
(E) and cslA mutants (F) and the cslA mutant harboring pMAT7 without (G) or with (H) added dispersin B. All strains were grown in TSBS medium for 24 h at 30oC. The effects on morphology were visualized by wide-field microscopy. Bar, 500 µm. FIGURE 5: Effect of cellulases and dispersin B on mycelial morphology. Light micrographs show S. lividans 66 (A), S. lividans 66 treated with 2 U/ml cellulase (B), 100 µg/ml dispersin B (C) or both cellulase and dispersin B (D), the matB
(E) and cslA mutants (F) and the cslA mutant harboring pMAT7 without (G) or with (H) added dispersin B. All strains were grown in TSBS medium for 24 h at 30oC. The effects on morphology were visualized by wide-field microscopy. Bar, 500 µm. Mechanistic insight into matA and matB in relation to cslA To further assess the contribution of the two different EPSs to hyphal aggregation and pellet formation, we investigated the affinity of the hyphae for hydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces, via adherence assays on glass and polystyrene, respectively. Attachment to glass depended on matA and matB, and was not visibly reduced in cslA mutants as compared to that of the parental strain (Fig. 6, left). Conversely, attachment to polystyrene was mostly dependent on cslA, and was less affected in matA and matB mutants (Fig. 6, right). Quantification of attachment by measuring cell-attached crystal violet spectrophotometrically, further confirmed the distinct roles for these genes (Fig. S2). This indicates that the EPS produced by CslA plays a dominant role in adherence to hydrophobic surfaces, while the PNAG produced by MatAB is particularly relevant for adherence to hydrophilic surfaces. This not only shows that the two EPSs have distinct non-redundant roles in aggregation, but also suggests that pellet formation in shaken liquid cultures depends on both hydrophilic and hydrophobic adhesive forces. Figure 6FIGURE 6: Adhesion assays visualizing EPS-mediated attachment to glass and polystyrene.Attachment of S. lividans 66 to glass was antagonized by treatment with dispersin B (50 µg/ml) or by deletion of matAB, while addition of cellulase (0.2 U/ml) or deletion of cslA had no effect. The opposite was seen for attachment to polystyrene, which was antagonized by cellulase or by deletion of cslA and not by dispersin B or deletion of matAB. The ability to attach to glass was restored to matAB mutants by the introduction of plasmid pMAT7. FIGURE 6: Adhesion assays visualizing EPS-mediated attachment to glass and polystyrene. Attachment of S. lividans 66 to glass was antagonized by treatment with dispersin B (50 µg/ml) or by deletion of matAB, while addition of cellulase (0.2 U/ml) or deletion of cslA had no effect. The opposite was seen for attachment to polystyrene, which was antagonized by cellulase or by deletion of cslA and not by dispersin B or deletion of matAB. The ability to attach to glass was restored to matAB mutants by the introduction of plasmid pMAT7.