RESULTS Here we present ARTS, an easy to use web tool for the high-throughput screening of bacterial genomes for their potential to produce antibacterial compounds with interesting modes of action. To our knowledge, ARTS is currently the only public web server that automates an extended target-directed genome mining that includes potentially novel targets. It demonstrates significantly increased throughput compared to manual target-directed methods and allows for intuitive visualizations and rapid explorations of several resistance factors. A manual phylogenetic analysis of all core genes, with alignments and Maximum-Likelihood tree construction, took over 89 h of processing time alone on a 16-core machine. By leveraging the pre-computed reference, the analysis took 15 min using the same resources with ARTS. Aside from processing time, the interactive browser format proved to be more accessible and faster to interpret than manual methods. The ARTS web server and analysis scripts are available to the public with git repository at: https://bitbucket.org/ziemertlab/arts Reference set and core gene analysis To verify that core genes inferred from reference organisms are essential, comparisons to experimental examples and properties of essential genes were interrogated. A total of 664 essential gene models (Supplementary File S2) are identified using the core genome methods and 432 remain when filtered as detailed in the Supplementary Methods. Comparison to the experimentally confirmed Database of Essential Genes (24) (DEG) v13 shows 538 genes in the set match to one or more records. Functional classification reveals that the majority of genes not found in DEG are in unknown, unclassified, or energy and metabolism categories (Supplementary File S3). Additionally, all reference core gene hits, compared to all TIGRFAM hits, showed enrichment for essential functions such as: protein and amino acid synthesis, energy and metabolism, and transcription (Supplementary File S4). A variety of approaches to determine essential genes can be found in literature where ubiquity and conservation of sequence are properties frequently exploited (25–27). Nearly all of the set share these properties (Supplementary File S5) with a dN/dS mode of 0.35 and range of 0.05–1.05 illustrating strong purifying selection. While more than half of the genes are present in over 90% of genomes, many are specific to certain genera. One example is the 20S proteasome, which is essential to many actinobacterial genera but is lacking in others with only 64% global reference ubiquity. By defining core genes relative to family, this specific function is captured. All resulting trees showed valid branch support (Supplementary S6) with single copy gene trees showing monophyletic groupings. Detection frequency and false positives To estimate false positive rates, total hit frequencies for BGCs and complete genome sequences were evaluated as a proxy due to the unknown amount of true positives. This was done in exploratory mode to assess the upper limit of hit frequencies unless stated otherwise. BGC clusters We analyzed all 1409 characterized BGCs from the MIBiG database and found roughly a third (465), a quarter (348) and 12% (162) have at least one gene match to models from core gene, known resistance or both respectively. For core genes this is largely attributed to cell envelope, amino acid and protein synthesis, and energy metabolism genes. In comparison, default mode, which lacks protein families likely involved in biosynthesis, transport and regulation, showed <15% of clusters have a core gene match with a dramatic reduction in cell envelope and primary metabolism categories (Supplementary File S7). Additionally, multiple hits in the same cluster are rare and, if present, likely indicate inaccurate cluster boundaries rather than cluster participation. With respect to total genes present, <3.7 and 1.9% are marked as core gene and known resistance hits respectively. Complete genomes We then analyzed 200 complete Actinobacteria genomes, publicly available through NCBI, though the ARTS pipeline and detected 489 core genes per genome, on average, with only one or two genes showing three or more selection criteria (Supplementary File S8). Approximately 5% of core genes are highlighted for each criterion with the exception of phylogeny, which shows an average of 26% of all core genes highlighted. Although this initially seems high, this rate is similar to other HGT estimates of about 35% HGT for Actinobacteria (28). This shows that multiple screening criteria should be used for more confident target predictions. The occasional high counts seen in exploration mode (Supplementary File S9) can be easily and rapidly filtered by the manageable output page. Besides cross referencing with multiple criteria, single criteria hits can be narrowed by several properties such as gene prevalence, copy number statistics and function. This can dramatically filter hits and allows for expert review by the researcher. Likewise, high core hits in BGCs are easily screened using the visual annotation. Figure 3A shows added coloring to highlight multiple criteria, and hits are also seen more central in the predicted cluster. Where many core genes are captured by inaccurate cluster boundaries, as in Figure 3B, inspection can serve not only to screen possible hits but also to help define true cluster boundaries, which remains a largely unresolved challenge when dealing with bacterial BGCs. Figure 3.ARTS cluster visualizations from example genome Streptomyces roseochromogenes DS 12.976 where core genes are shown in yellow, known resistance in green and hits for both shown in purple. (A) Purple: positive control of resistant gyrB, Green: DNA topoisomerase IV (B) Example of cluster boundaries capturing core genes not associated with the cluster. ARTS cluster visualizations from example genome Streptomyces roseochromogenes DS 12.976 where core genes are shown in yellow, known resistance in green and hits for both shown in purple. (A) Purple: positive control of resistant gyrB, Green: DNA topoisomerase IV (B) Example of cluster boundaries capturing core genes not associated with the cluster. Positive controls In order to test ARTS, we performed an extensive literature search and analyzed all known examples of BGCs and available bacterial genomes, that contained known examples of resistant target genes. Out of the 26 identified clusters from known examples within the MIBiG database, ARTS detected 22 clusters with resistant targets in exploration mode (Supplementary File S10). Three undetected cases were due to missing specific DNA glycosylation and CoA reductase models in both the core and known resistance set. The last missed case, the resistance conferring 23S rRNA methyltransferase, was identified in clusters for Erythromycin and Pikromycin but not Avilamycin due to its significantly shorter sequence length and low homology score. The default search mode showed that 3 positive cases for FabB/F were not detected. Both gene families are frequently used for the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites with no possibility at the moment to easily distinguish in silico if they are involved in resistance or biosynthesis. However, with expert review in exploration mode these cases were detected. The literature search for self-resistance mechanisms that had genomes of at least draft quality available yielded 14 cases, all of which were processed with ARTS. All cases except for the resistant FabB/F showed an ARTS hit (Table 1), which is detected in exploration mode using reduced cutoffs. Two cases of rpoB resistance, single copy mutants not present in a BGC, were marked as known resistant targets with no other criteria shown. In the case of Rifampicin however, the duplicated resistance conferring rpoB was detected. The results of an ARTS analysis of Salinispora tropica CNB-440, the producer of salinosporamide A, (29), shows positive hits for all the criteria tested. The β-subunit of the proteasome is a known target of salinosporamide A and the producing cluster contains a resistant copy localized within the operon (15). The incorporated models of known resistant targets highlights the gene to indicate that both core and resistant target matches were found. From the phylogeny view the resistant copy is quickly seen as having origins from outside its species and is marked for potential HGT. Positive examples of genomes with known self-resistance mechanisms analyzed with ARTS default mode . Distant genomes Although ARTS is so far specialized for actinobacterial genomes, it can also be applied to organisms that are not part of the reference phylum, as demonstrated by the positive results for all three examples from Firmicutes and Proteobacteria (Table 1). One example, the Agrocin 84 producer Agrobacterium radiobacter K84, showed a duplicated resistant Leu-tRNA synthetase located on the pAgK84 plasmid that was detected but with no cluster predictions present. Further investigation showed the producing cluster is indeed part of the plasmid (30) and an extended BGC prediction using the ClusterFinder (31) algorithm yielded a putative 9kb segment which did not include this resistance gene. By highlighting potential resistance outside of predicted clusters, this example shows how ARTS can serve not only as a cluster prioritization tool but also as an orthogonal detection method to complement current methods.