RESULTS Transcriptional analysis of the tun gene cluster. Inspection of the tun gene cluster (Fig. 1) revealed that of the 14 genes, 10 appeared to be translationally coupled to the gene upstream. This, together with a maximal intergenic spacing of 39 bp, suggested that the entire tun gene cluster might be expressed in a single operon. To address this possibility, RNA was prepared from a lawn of S. coelicolor M1152 containing the cloned tun gene cluster present on a 12.9-kb SacI fragment of pIJ12003a (7) and used in reverse transcription (RT)-PCR experiments with primer pairs corresponding to tun sequences located approximately 100 nt from the ends and beginnings of adjacent genes (see Table S1 in the supplemental material). Amplification of cDNA spanning each of the gene junctions (Fig. 1) was indeed consistent with transcription of the tun genes in a single operon. To locate the potential transcriptional start site(s) of this likely tun operon, 5′ rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) experiments were carried out using the S. coelicolor RNA preparation, and also RNA from S. chartreusis using five different primers, RACE1 to RACE5 (Table S1). Two putative transcriptional starts sites (tunp1 and tunp2) were identified in RNA isolated from S. chartreusis and located within the SacI fragment; while the tunp2 transcript was not observed in RNA from S. coelicolor/pIJ12003a, transcription initiation at the promoter, aprp, of the apramycin resistance gene present in the cloning vector was detected (Fig. 2). To assess whether these 5′ transcript ends represented promoter activity in vivo (as opposed to mRNA processing or degradation), PCR fragments were generated that contained each individual putative promoter element, inserted into the β-glucuronidase reporter plasmid pGUS (9) and introduced into S. coelicolor M1152. Growth on R5 agar containing the β-glucosiduronic acid-derived substrate X-gluc confirmed promoter activity for tunp1 and aprp, but not for tunp2 (Fig. 3), consistent with the lack of a detectable tunp2 transcript in S. coelicolor M1152/pIJ12003a. FIG 2Sequence of the tun promoter region showing the transcriptional start sites identified by 5′ RACE. Putative −10 and −35 regions, where discernible, are overscored in blue. The locations of the complementary primers used for 5′ RACE are indicated beneath the sequence by red arrows. Nucleotides 1 to 100 are derived from the cloning vector pRT802, used to construct pIJ12003a, and the SacI site at the end of the cloned tun gene fragment is shown in magenta. The N-terminal amino acid sequence of TunA is shown in green. aprp, transcriptional start site of the apramycin resistance (apr) gene; p1 and p2, transcriptional start sites of the putative tun operon. Sequence of the tun promoter region showing the transcriptional start sites identified by 5′ RACE. Putative −10 and −35 regions, where discernible, are overscored in blue. The locations of the complementary primers used for 5′ RACE are indicated beneath the sequence by red arrows. Nucleotides 1 to 100 are derived from the cloning vector pRT802, used to construct pIJ12003a, and the SacI site at the end of the cloned tun gene fragment is shown in magenta. The N-terminal amino acid sequence of TunA is shown in green. aprp, transcriptional start site of the apramycin resistance (apr) gene; p1 and p2, transcriptional start sites of the putative tun operon. FIG 3(Top) Gus reporter assays on R5 agar of promoter fragments initiating transcription of the tun gene cluster in S. coelicolor M1152 (negative, pGUS without an insert). Putative promoters contained within the inserted PCR fragments are indicated by aprp (putative promoter of the apramycin resistance gene apr) and p1 and p2, putative promoters of the likely tun operon. Gus activity results in the production of an insoluble indigo-blue precipitate, which appears green on yellow R5 agar plates. (Bottom) Schematic showing the relative positions of the three identified transcriptional start sites and the extent of the sequences present in each inserted PCR fragment. aprp, transcriptional start site of the apramycin resistance gene (apr); p1 and p2, transcriptional start sites of the putative tun operon. (Top) Gus reporter assays on R5 agar of promoter fragments initiating transcription of the tun gene cluster in S. coelicolor M1152 (negative, pGUS without an insert). Putative promoters contained within the inserted PCR fragments are indicated by aprp (putative promoter of the apramycin resistance gene apr) and p1 and p2, putative promoters of the likely tun operon. Gus activity results in the production of an insoluble indigo-blue precipitate, which appears green on yellow R5 agar plates. (Bottom) Schematic showing the relative positions of the three identified transcriptional start sites and the extent of the sequences present in each inserted PCR fragment. aprp, transcriptional start site of the apramycin resistance gene (apr); p1 and p2, transcriptional start sites of the putative tun operon. Antibiotic production in S. coelicolor under conditions of nitrogen limitation is dependent on the intracellular signaling molecular ppGpp (10). To assess whether tun gene transcription was dependent on ppGpp, the same β-glucuronidase promoter fusions were introduced into S. coelicolor M145 and its ΔrelA mutant M571, and the resulting exconjugants were assayed for promoter activity on supplemented minimal medium solid (SMMS) agar containing X-gluc; no differences in promoter activity were observed between the two strains (data not shown). Deletion analysis of the tun gene cluster. Previous work showed that deletion of tunB abolished tunicamycin production and provided new insights into its likely role in tunicamycin biosynthesis (8). To assess the validity of the rest of the proposed tunicamycin biosynthetic pathway, in-frame deletion mutations were made by PCR-targeting for all 13 of the remaining putative biosynthetic genes, and the mutated plasmid derivatives were introduced into S. coelicolor M1152 by conjugation from Escherichia coli. The resulting strains were then assayed for antimicrobial activity, using Bacillus subtilis EC1524 as an indicator strain (Fig. 4). Individual deletion of tunACDEH abolished activity, while individual oblation of tunFGK significantly or markedly reduced it; mutations in tunLMN had no significant effects on the sizes of the zones of inhibition. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analyses of culture supernatants obtained from the individual tunFGKLMN mutants confirmed retention of tunicamycin biosynthesis (very low for tunF), while supernatants from the mutants lacking antimicrobial activity failed to show the typical characteristic tunicamycin mass spectrum of the wild-type gene cluster (see reference 7; data not shown). FIG 4Bioassays of S. coelicolor M1152 derivatives containing a mutated tun gene cluster together with the empty vector pRT802 (left) or complementation construct (right). M1152 derivatives containing pIJ12003a or pRT802 as positive and negative controls, respectively, are also shown (center bottom). N/A, not applicable. Bioassays of S. coelicolor M1152 derivatives containing a mutated tun gene cluster together with the empty vector pRT802 (left) or complementation construct (right). M1152 derivatives containing pIJ12003a or pRT802 as positive and negative controls, respectively, are also shown (center bottom). N/A, not applicable. To confirm that the loss of antibiotic production in the tunACDEH mutants and the reduction in the tunFGK deletion strains reflected the in-frame deletion of individual genes, and not polar effects on the expression of downstream genes, PCR fragments containing each of the deleted genes were cloned individually in pIJ12551 (tunACDEGHK) or in pSET152 (tunF) under the control of the constitutive ermE* promoter and introduced into the S. coelicolor derivative containing the corresponding mutated tun gene cluster. With the exception of tunA (see Discussion), antimicrobial activity against B. subtilis was restored in the nonproducing strains and was markedly increased in the tunFGK mutants (Fig. 4), confirming that the loss or reduction of antibiotic activity did indeed reflect the inactivation of individual genes. To identify possible biosynthetic intermediates, culture supernatants and acid extracts of the mycelia of the tunCDEH mutants were also assessed by mass spectrometry for the production of the predicted biosynthetic intermediates that would be expected to accumulate based on the proposed biosynthetic pathway. However, none of the predicted molecular ions could be detected (data not shown). A comparative untargeted metabolomics analysis (11) of these strains also failed to show differential accumulation in any of the mutants of any metabolites with masses compatible with tunicamycin-related molecules. An attempt was then made to identify the production of tunicamycin biosynthetic intermediates by cross-feeding and coculture experiments, using all possible pairwise combinations of mutants (including the tunB mutant) in which antibiotic activity had been lost. Bioactivity was assessed by overlaying the cross-feeding and coculture plates with a lawn of B. subtilis cells. In no case was antibiotic production restored (data not shown). Immunity to tunicamycin. In addition to making in-frame deletion mutations in the tun genes thought to be involved in tunicamycin biosynthesis, we also attempted to make similar mutations in tunIJ, encoding a putative ABC transporter and believed to be required for export of the intracellular antibiotic. Attempts were made to make in-frame deletions of tunIJ together and of each gene individually, and the effect of the mutations on tunicamycin production was assessed as before, using B. subtilis EC1524 as the indicator strain. In contrast to the other tun gene mutations, exconjugants with deletions of tunIJ or tunI took up to 2 weeks to emerge and were few in number. When both genes were deleted simultaneously, two mutant phenotypes were obtained, a marked reduction in antibiotic activity (the ΔtunIJ-A phenotype) and a complete loss of activity (the ΔtunIJ-B phenotype). Introduction of pIJ12551::tunIJ into each of the mutants had no significant effect on their phenotypes (Fig. 5a). FIG 5Bioassays of agar plugs of S. coelicolor M1152 containing the wild-type tun gene cluster (pIJ12003a), and failed attempts to complement the tunIJ, tunI, and tunJ mutants with wild-type versions of the deleted gene(s). In each case, B. subtilis EC1524 was used as the indicator strain. pIJ12551, the empty vector used in the complementation experiments. In panel B, note that while the pIJ12003a ΔtunI-A mutant clone generally gave a small zone of inhibition (see Fig. S2 in the supplemental material), it failed to do so in this particular assay. Bioassays of agar plugs of S. coelicolor M1152 containing the wild-type tun gene cluster (pIJ12003a), and failed attempts to complement the tunIJ, tunI, and tunJ mutants with wild-type versions of the deleted gene(s). In each case, B. subtilis EC1524 was used as the indicator strain. pIJ12551, the empty vector used in the complementation experiments. In panel B, note that while the pIJ12003a ΔtunI-A mutant clone generally gave a small zone of inhibition (see Fig. S2 in the supplemental material), it failed to do so in this particular assay. Sequencing of the tun gene cluster in the ΔtunIJ-A mutant revealed insertion of a T toward the end of tunG (immediately after the codon for aspartate 171 of the 203-amino acid [aa] TunG) that would result in the production of a TunGH fusion protein. While earlier deletion of tunG reduced tunicamycin production, mutation of tunH, which encodes a putative UDP-tunicaminyl-uracil pyrophosphatase, abolished it. Thus, the frameshift mutation may have resulted in a fusion protein with little or no TunH activity and may have also markedly reduced or abolished translation initiation at the natural tunH start codon, thus resulting in markedly reduced levels of tunicamycin production. Sequencing of the tun gene cluster in the ΔtunIJ-B mutant revealed a frameshift mutation in tunD, which is predicted to encode the glycosyltransferase required for addition of an N-acetylglucosamine moiety to tunicaminyl-uracil. The insertion of a G after the codon for threonine 279, while leaving glycine 280 and proline 281 unchanged, would replace the C-terminal 191-aa residues of the 472-aa TunD protein with 107 residues of presumably nonfunctional protein (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material), likely accounting for the lack of bioactivity and failure to complement the mutation. In-frame deletion of tunI alone yielded the same two mutant phenotypes (A and B, marked reduction in and complete loss of antibiotic activity, respectively) observed as when tunI and tunJ were deleted simultaneously; introduction of pIJ12551::tunI into each of the mutants had no significant effect on their phenotypes (Fig. 5b). Sequencing of the tun gene cluster in the tunI-A mutant revealed a single nucleotide change, a T to C transition found four nucleotides upstream of the GTG start codon of tunA. To confirm that this mutation was indeed responsible for the low level of antibiotic activity, this same mutation was introduced into pIJ12003a by replacing the 2.4-kb SacI-StuI region of the wild-type tun gene cluster with a PCR fragment generated from the mutated plasmid. The resulting construct (pBDW177) was confirmed by sequencing and introduced into S. coelicolor M1152, whereupon it gave the same phenotype as the tunI-A mutant, i.e., a much-reduced level of antimicrobial activity (see Fig. S2 in the supplemental material). Sequencing of the tun gene cluster in the ΔtunI-B mutant revealed a G to A missense mutation in tunC that would result in a Gly to Asp substitution at position 70 of the putative 318-aa N-acyltransferase, presumably resulting in loss of enzyme function and lack of tunicamycin production. In-frame deletion of tunJ alone resulted in loss of antibiotic production that could not be complemented by introduction of pIJ12551::tunJ (Fig. 5c); subsequent sequencing of the tun gene cluster in two of these possibly clonal mutants revealed the insertion of a copy of IS10 toward the end of tunD (one nucleotide after the codon for glycine 436 of TunD) that must have occurred when pIJ12003a was passaged through E. coli for mutant construction. Insertion of IS10 occurred after nucleotide 12871 of GenBank accession number HQ172897 and resulted in the duplication of residues 12863 to 12871. The time taken for the emergence of the S. coelicolor M1152 exconjugants containing the tunJ deletion was normal for an E. coli-Streptomyces conjugation, in contrast to the prolonged period required for emergence of the tunI suppressor mutants, and was consistent with insertion of IS10 into tunD in E. coli. In all five cases, the unexpected mutations were presumably not only responsible for the lack of bioactivity, but also for the failure to complement the tunIJ mutants with wild-type copies of the genes. Both tunIJ and tunM confer immunity to tunicamycin in S. coelicolor. The results obtained above suggested that in addition to playing a role in the export of tunicamycin, tunIJ also played a role in conferring immunity to the antibiotic in the producing organism, and that their deletion resulted in lethality or the selection of mutations that abolished or markedly reduced the level of tunicamycin production. To assess the potential role of these genes in immunity, S. coelicolor derivatives containing the wild-type tun gene cluster and derivatives from which tunIJ, tunK, tunL, tunM, or tunN had been deleted were plated as lawns on R5 agar, and their susceptibility to tunicamycin was assessed. While the wild-type gene cluster conferred complete immunity to exogenous tunicamycin, deletion of tunIJ and, surprisingly, of tunL and tunM, resulted in increased sensitivity, although all three deletion mutants were noticeably more resistant than the strain containing the empty vector (pRT802) (Fig. 6a). Deletion of tunK or tunN had no effect on susceptibility to tunicamycin. FIG 6Assays of sensitivity to tunicamycin. (a) Filter paper discs containing 0 or 75 μg tunicamycin were laid on top of lawns of spores of S. coelicolor M1152 derivatives containing the wild-type tun gene cluster (pIJ12003a) and various deleted versions. Deletion of tunIJ, tunL, or tunM resulted in increased sensitivity to tunicamycin. (b) Filter paper discs containing 0, 7.5, or 75 μg tunicamycin were laid on top of lawns of spores of S. coelicolor M1152 derivatives containing the ermE*p expression vector pIJ12551 or derivatives thereof containing tunIJ, tunM, or tunL. In both sets of assays, R5 agar was used, and the plates were incubated at 30°C for 48 h. Assays of sensitivity to tunicamycin. (a) Filter paper discs containing 0 or 75 μg tunicamycin were laid on top of lawns of spores of S. coelicolor M1152 derivatives containing the wild-type tun gene cluster (pIJ12003a) and various deleted versions. Deletion of tunIJ, tunL, or tunM resulted in increased sensitivity to tunicamycin. (b) Filter paper discs containing 0, 7.5, or 75 μg tunicamycin were laid on top of lawns of spores of S. coelicolor M1152 derivatives containing the ermE*p expression vector pIJ12551 or derivatives thereof containing tunIJ, tunM, or tunL. In both sets of assays, R5 agar was used, and the plates were incubated at 30°C for 48 h. To assess whether expression of tunIJ, tunL, or tunM alone could confer immunity to tunicamycin in S. coelicolor, the pIJ12551 expression constructs containing each of the genes that had been used in the earlier complementation assays were introduced into S. coelicolor M1152 by conjugation, and the resulting strains were used in tunicamycin susceptibility assays. Expression of either tunIJ or tunM from the ermE* promoter conferred complete immunity, while expression of tunL resulted in the same level of susceptibility as that of the vector control (Fig. 6b). We therefore assume that the enhanced susceptibility to tunicamycin shown by the tunL deletion mutant observed above reflected a polar effect on tunM expression.