2. Results 2.1. The Negative Effect of cesH on Cereulide Production The growth of B. cereus AH187 in CADM medium (Complete Amino acids Defined Medium) and CADM containing 1% and 2% glucose, respectively, were assessed. The effect of increasing glucose concentration was illustrated in Figure 1a, where a higher OD value and total biomass were attained from the 12th to 72nd hour with the presence of glucose, albeit with no visual difference before entry into the logarithmic phase (0–12 h). The cells at the 8th, 16th, and 24th hour, respectively, were harvested for cereulide measurement. The results showed that the addition of 1% and 2% glucose initiated a ca. 30% increase in the average amount of cereulide per biomass in the bacterial logarithmic phase, while it resulted in a ca. 30% decline when the growth entered the stationary phase (at both the 16th and 24th hour) in comparison with that in CADM without glucose (Figure 1b). Furthermore, the transcriptional levels of genes related to cereulide production were monitored in cells at different time points. It was found that the transcription of ilvB, responsible for facilitating substrate accumulation, was increased 12- to 15-fold at the 8th hour, whereas it was nearly shut down at the 16th and 24th hours (Figure 1c). A similar trend was displayed on the transcriptional level of the non-ribosomal polypeptide synthetase structural gene cesA (Figure 1d). In contrast, the mRNA level of cesH was low at the early stage, but obviously increased at the latter two time points. Furthermore, it was remarkably enhanced with the addition of glucose at all three tested intervals (Figure 1e). In addition, a B. cereus AH187 cesH null mutant (ΔcesH) and the complemented strain (Cm.ΔcesH) were constructed, respectively, and the effect of cesH deletion on cereulide accumulation was evaluated. At the early stage, the cereulide amount in ΔcesH was 12 times higher than that of the wild type (319 μg/g) but recovered to the same level with the wild type when cesH was complemented. At the 16th and 24th hour, the maximum production was observed in ΔcesH at 1250 μg/g, which was ca. 50 times higher than that in the wild type, and the complementary led to a decline in amplitude, but was still much higher than that in the wild type (Figure 1f). The data suggested that CesH displayed a negative effect on cereulide production. 2.2. Prediction and Characterization of CesH as a Membrane Associated Esterase As predicted by the Esther database, the protein encoded by cesH could belong to the alpha/beta hydrolase superfamily. The secondary and tertiary details revealed via Phyre2.0 identified four alpha helices and seven beta strands in CesH. Furthermore, the 3D structure modeling analysis indicated that CesH was folded as a globular protein where S86, E199, and H277 are placed in close position, and might be involved in substrate binding and catalytic reaction. Moreover, the secondary structure element (236–247) located at the C terminal was found to be an amphipathic helix, indicating that CesH may be a membrane associated protein (Figure 2a) [26]. The B. cereus AH187 recombinant strains containing gfp alone and cesH tagged with gfp were constructed, respectively. Microscopic study showed that the fluorescence was evenly displayed within the whole cytoplasmic area when the GFP was expressed alone (B. cereus AH187 gfp), whereas it was only labeled around the entire cell wall/membrane after GPF was linked to the C terminal of CesH (B. cereus AH187 cesH-gfp). Furthermore, the heterologous expressed CesH was purified from the Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3)/pET28a-cesH strain containing Triton X-100, and its activity against para-nitrophenyl acetate (PNPC2), a candidate substrate for alpha/beta hydrolase, was detected. The activity of CesH had an optimal temperature of 37 °C (Figure 2c), a Km of 0.0396 mM and a Vmax of 92.36 U/g (Figure 2d). The data indicated that CesH could be an esterase. 2.3. The Effect of CesH on Cereulide Analogue–Valinomycin In Vitro and In Vivo Surprisingly, the purified CesH was not able to catalyze in vitro the hydrolysis of cereulide and valinomycin (data not shown). Considering that CesH is a membrane bound esterase and the toxins are extremely hydrophobic, the hydrolytic activity of the purified CesH might have been blocked, which was caused by the utilization of the detergent Triton X-100 during protein purification. As an alternative, the in vivo method was designed to evaluate the activity of CesH through assaying the bacterial resistance to valinomycin, a cereulide analogue. For this purpose, a recombinant B. subtilis 168 containing pHT315-cesH (named B. subtilis 168H) was constructed. The result showed that valinomycin exposure had no obvious influence on the growth of recombinant B. subtilis 168H containing cesH. While a significant negative effect on the growth of the wild type strain was detected, the viable cell number of the wild type strain dropped by nearly three orders of magnitude and OD values were fixed to a narrow range around minimum within the initiated eight hours, whereas they steadily recovered to the same level as those of the wild type strain without valinomycin and the recombinant 168H with valinomycin from the 12th hour. This suggested that the introduction of pHT315-cesH in vivo could neutralize the bacteriostasis effect of valinomycin (Figure 3a,b). To determine the fate of valinomycin coexisting with B. subtilis 168H, the cells were incubated with 90 μM valinomycin in PBS buffer for 90 min, respectively, and the concentration of valinomycin was assayed at each 15 min. The chromatogram results of the reaction mixture at 0 min, 30 min, and 60 min were displayed in Figure 3c. Along with the incubation, the peak (retention time = 9.4 min) was split and the peak area was decreased, which was linear correlation with the concentration of valinomycin. Due to the background degradation in the wild type (ca. 7 μM/15 min), the results in B. subtilis 168H were presented as the relative degradation ratio. It was found that the toxin was swiftly eliminated within one hour and a maximum relative degradation ratio (ca. 45%) was kept in the remaining time. Subsequently, to identify the key residues of CesH, site mutations were inserted into the shutter vector of B. subtilis 168H, where the predicted catalytic residues as well as other possible amino acids were used as candidates. It was found that the substitutions on the Serine 86 and Histidine 227 obviously impaired the valinomycin resistance of B. subtilis 168H, whereas that of Glutamate 199 caused a milder effect. In addition, the results on the Histidine 189 were provided as representative of other equivalent mutations (albeit at a slightly attenuated growth) (Figure 3e,f). This indicates that Serine 86, Glutamate 199, and Histidine 227 might be the necessary catalytic core of CesH.