Results Identification and cloning of putative microbial enzymes via a synthetic metagenomic pipeline We used a metagenomic sequencing pipeline (Fig 1A) to identify four microbial genes from porcupine fecal samples predicted to encode putative cellulose- or hemicellulose-degrading enzymes; a β-glucosidase, an α-L-arabinofuranosidase, a β-xylosidase, and an endo-1,4-β-xylanase (Figs 1B and 2A). In brief, shotgun sequences were trimmed and assembled into contigs (Fig 1A). Open reading frames (ORFs) with upstream bacterial ribosome binding sites were identified on the compiled contigs. ORFs were translated in silico and identified by similarity of predicted primary amino acid sequences to conserved domains from known enzymes found in the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics Protein Data Bank (Fig 1B). We specifically queried β-glucosidase enzymes that catalyze the final step in cellulose degradation by converting cellobiose disaccharides to glucose monomers (Fig 2B), and α-L-arabinofuranosidase, β-xylosidase, and endo-1,4-β-xylanase enzymes that catalyze sequential steps in the degradation of hemicellulose to xylose monomers (Fig 2C). This collection of putative enzymes is insufficient to achieve full degradation of complex lignocellulose substrates, but their synthesis and characterization served as an important test of our synthetic metagenomic pipeline. 10.1371/journal.pone.0209221.g001Fig 1Identification of four genes from the porcupine microbiome with putative cellulose- and/or hemicellulose-degrading activity using a metagenomic sequencing pipeline.The bioinformatic pipeline (A) began with Illumina MiSeq data previously collected from a porcupine fecal DNA sequencing project [14]. Reads were checked for quality and trimmed, concatemerized via MegaHit [15], and open reading frames were identified using Prodigal [16]. Protein sequences of interest were identified by pHMMER [17] using various protein databases and were selected for matches of interest based on e-value selection. (B) Top putative microbial enzymes identified by the metagenomic sequencing pipeline; putative signal sequences are shown in orange and predicted conserved protein domains are shown. Identification of four genes from the porcupine microbiome with putative cellulose- and/or hemicellulose-degrading activity using a metagenomic sequencing pipeline. The bioinformatic pipeline (A) began with Illumina MiSeq data previously collected from a porcupine fecal DNA sequencing project [14]. Reads were checked for quality and trimmed, concatemerized via MegaHit [15], and open reading frames were identified using Prodigal [16]. Protein sequences of interest were identified by pHMMER [17] using various protein databases and were selected for matches of interest based on e-value selection. (B) Top putative microbial enzymes identified by the metagenomic sequencing pipeline; putative signal sequences are shown in orange and predicted conserved protein domains are shown. 10.1371/journal.pone.0209221.g002Fig 2Four putative cellulose-/hemicellulose-degrading enzymes identified from the porcupine microbiome.A) Functional description of putative enzymes with corresponding e-values. The e-value is a measure of confidence, with lower values denoting higher confidence. B) The catabolic pathway that converts cellobiose to glucose. C) The catabolic pathway that converts hemicellulose to xylose. Four putative cellulose-/hemicellulose-degrading enzymes identified from the porcupine microbiome. A) Functional description of putative enzymes with corresponding e-values. The e-value is a measure of confidence, with lower values denoting higher confidence. B) The catabolic pathway that converts cellobiose to glucose. C) The catabolic pathway that converts hemicellulose to xylose. In silico analysis of putative enzymes Metagenomic sequencing sequences all genetic material present in a microbiome rather than individual microbial genomes. To determine the genetic origin of the genes of interest, the predicted primary amino acid sequence of each candidate gene was queried against the NCBI non-redundant protein sequence database using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) [18]. Each of the four putative enzymes from the porcupine microbiome were most closely related to enzymes encoded by anaerobic bacteria, which was expected because the gut is an anaerobic environment. Specifically, the putative β-xylosidase was 75% identical (100% coverage) to a β-xylosidase from Butyrivibrio sp. CAG:318. The putative β-glucosidase was 73% identical (99% coverage) to a β-glucosidase encoded by Bacteroides faecis MAJ27. The putative α-L-arabinofuranosidase was 63% identical (92% coverage) to a glycosyl hydrolase (GH) family 43 protein encoded by Prevotella sp. CAG:732. The putative endo-1,4-β-xylanase was 55% identical (99% coverage) to a hypothetical protein BHV73_02415 encoded by Bacteroides sp. 44_46 and predicted to contain GH10 and GH43 domains. We concluded that the four genes we selected for study were novel but nevertheless closely related to previously identified genes from anaerobic bacteria encoding known cellulose and hemicellulose-degrading enzymes. Phylogenetic analysis of all four putative gene products was performed using the 22 closest homologs for each (S1 Table). The putative endo-1,4-β-xylanase and β-glucosidase enzymes clustered closely with their homologs in a clade (Fig 3). These clades were strongly supported by high bootstrap values (100 and 100, respectively) on each node, generated from compiling 100 separate trees. The putative α-L-arabinofuranosidase did not fall into a clade, but did cluster with its closest homologs, whereas β-xylosidase clustered poorly. Next, predicted amino acid sequences of all four putative enzymes were aligned with closest homologs to determine conservation of key catalytic residues (S1A–S1D Fig). A key aspartic acid is conserved in the catalytic domain of the putative β-glucosidase; this residue was conserved across all 22 proteins analyzed, with 4 examples aligned to the putative enzyme in S1A Fig By contrast, the catalytic domain of endo-1,4-β-xylanase consists of two conserved aspartic acids and a glutamic acid; all three residues were perfectly conserved amongst all 22 proteins analyzed and 4 example sequences were aligned to the putative endo-1,4-β-xylanase in S1B Fig α-L-arabinofuranosidase similarly has two conserved aspartic acids and a single glutamic acid in the active site that is perfectly conserved amongst all proteins analyzed (S1B Fig). The putative β-xylosidase showed low conservation from amino acids 190–230, but the conserved catalytic domain requiring the two conserved aspartic acids and a single glutamic acid were also found to be conserved amongst all analyzed sequences. Identifying and confirming the catalytic sites provided evidence that these proteins may function in a biological system and require functional assays to determine activity by de novo synthesis of these open reading frames. 10.1371/journal.pone.0209221.g003Fig 3Phylogenetic analysis of putative enzymes.Phylogenetic analysis of A) α-L-arabinofuranosidase, B) β-glucosidase, C) β-xylosidase, and D) Endo-1,4-β-xylanase were created from primary amino acid sequence that were aligned using ClustalW and generated using RAxML 7.2.8. Sequences were taken from highly related proteins from the BLASTP database. Trees were replicated 100 times for statistical strength with bootstrap values presented at each node. Putative enzymes are highlighted in red. Phylogenetic analysis of putative enzymes. Phylogenetic analysis of A) α-L-arabinofuranosidase, B) β-glucosidase, C) β-xylosidase, and D) Endo-1,4-β-xylanase were created from primary amino acid sequence that were aligned using ClustalW and generated using RAxML 7.2.8. Sequences were taken from highly related proteins from the BLASTP database. Trees were replicated 100 times for statistical strength with bootstrap values presented at each node. Putative enzymes are highlighted in red. Synthesis, expression and secretion of putative enzymes in E. coli The four putative microbial enzymes were synthesized and cloned into the pET26b(+) vector to enable IPTG-inducible gene expression in E. coli. Because directed secretion of enzymes provides access to extracellular lignocellulosic substrates, each candidate gene was cloned as a fusion protein bearing an amino-terminal PelB motif required for periplasmic localization and subsequent secretion. A hexahistidine (6xHIS) tag was added to carboxy-termini of each fusion protein to enable affinity purification. Log-phase E. coli cultures were treated with IPTG to induce transgene expression, followed by harvest of cell supernatant, periplasm and total cell fractions. Specifically, proteins in the supernatant were harvested by trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation and periplasmic proteins were harvested by cold osmotic extraction as previously described [19]. These fractions were subjected to SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting to detect 6XHIS fusion proteins (Fig 4). All four putative enzymes accumulated in the total cell fraction at the predicted molecular weight: β-xylosidase at ~51 kDa, endo-1,4-β-xylanase at ~81 kDa, α-L-arabinofuranosidase at ~61 kDa, and β-glucosidase at ~84 kDa (Fig 4A). Among these putative enzymes, only the endo-1,4-β-xylanase failed to translocate to the periplasm, and it accumulated in the cell pellet fraction (Fig 4B and 4C). 10.1371/journal.pone.0209221.g004Fig 4Secretion assay of putative enzymes.Log-phase BL21(DE3) E. coli containing a putative enzyme or empty vector control were treated with 0.1 mM IPTG to induce T7-promoter-dependent transcription. After 3 hours, A) cells were lysed, B) cells were treated with cold osmotic shock to extract periplasmic protein fraction, or C) the supernatant was filtered, and protein was precipitated by addition of TCA. All protein fractions were prepared for SDS-PAGE and analyzed by western blot with an anti-His-antibody. Secretion assay of putative enzymes. Log-phase BL21(DE3) E. coli containing a putative enzyme or empty vector control were treated with 0.1 mM IPTG to induce T7-promoter-dependent transcription. After 3 hours, A) cells were lysed, B) cells were treated with cold osmotic shock to extract periplasmic protein fraction, or C) the supernatant was filtered, and protein was precipitated by addition of TCA. All protein fractions were prepared for SDS-PAGE and analyzed by western blot with an anti-His-antibody. Isolation and characterization of a putative β-glucosidase Treatment of transformed log-phase E. coli cultures with IPTG caused accumulation of our putative microbial β-glucosidase and the control β-glucosidase DesR [20, 21] at predicted molecular weights; both proteins were affinity purified and detected using a total protein stain (Fig 5A). Consistent with published reports, purified DesR efficiently cleaved a p-Nitrophenyl β-D-glucopyranoside (p-NPG) substrate in vitro at pH 7 (Fig 5B). By contrast, our putative β-glucosidase failed to cleave p-NPG over a broad pH range. Moreover, expression of the putative β-glucosidase in E. coli did not enable growth on cellobiose as a sole carbon source. Taken together, these findings indicate that our putative β-glucosidase does not function in conventional β-glucosidase assays. Because proteins with glycosyl hydrolase family 3 (GH3) domains can also have N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase activity, we tested our putative β-glucosidase and the DesR control for cleavage of p-Nitrophenyl β-N-acetylglucosamine (p-NPNAG). As expected, DesR did not cleave p-NPNAG. However, the putative β-glucosidase also failed to cleave p-NPNAG over a broad pH range (pH 5, 6, and 7) (Fig 5C). Taken together, these findings indicate that while the DesR control functioned as expected, the putative β-glucosidase from the porcupine microbiome did not display β-glucosidase or N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase activity. 10.1371/journal.pone.0209221.g005Fig 5Purification and characterization of β-glucosidase.A) Putative β-glucosidase and positive control β-glucosidase DesR (marked with red arrows) were affinity purified by 6xHis purification. B) Activity of the putative β-glucosidase against p-NPG at pH 5.0, 6.0 and 7.0; positive control β-glucosidase DesR was only tested at pH 7.0. C) Activity of putative β-glucosidase against p-NP-N-acetylglucosamine at pH 5.0, 6.0, and 7.0. Negative control β-glucosidase DesR was only tested at pH 7.0. Purification and characterization of β-glucosidase. A) Putative β-glucosidase and positive control β-glucosidase DesR (marked with red arrows) were affinity purified by 6xHis purification. B) Activity of the putative β-glucosidase against p-NPG at pH 5.0, 6.0 and 7.0; positive control β-glucosidase DesR was only tested at pH 7.0. C) Activity of putative β-glucosidase against p-NP-N-acetylglucosamine at pH 5.0, 6.0, and 7.0. Negative control β-glucosidase DesR was only tested at pH 7.0. Isolation and characterization of putative α-L-Arabinofuranosidase and β-xylosidase enzymes We purified the putative α-L-arabinofuranosidase using 6xHIS affinity purification as described above. Accumulation of affinity purified 6xHIS-α-L-arabinofuranosidase was detected by Coomassie blue staining (S2A Fig) and immunoblotting with an anti-6XHIS antibody (S2B Fig). Enzyme activity of was assessed using a p-NP-α-L-arabinofuranoside (p-NP-ALA) substrate. The putative microbial α-L-arabinofuranosidase failed to cleave p-NP-ALA over a range of acidic and neutral pH values (5, 6, and 7) (S2C Fig). Expression of the 6xHIS-β-xylosidase fusion protein revealed that the bulk of the putative enzyme accumulated in the insoluble pellet fraction. To promote proper folding and solubility of our putative β-xylosidase, we reduced IPTG levels from 1.0 mM to 0.1 mM and reduced the culture temperature to 20°C during the time of induction. Despite these efforts, the bulk of the 6xHIS-β-xylosidase fusion protein accumulated in the insoluble pellet, whereas only a small fraction was affinity purified and released into the eluate (S3A Fig). Enzyme activity was tested using pNP-β-D-xylopyranoside substrate. A commercial β-xylosidase positive control efficiently cleaved pNP-β-D-xylopyranoside over 30 minutes, but the putative microbial β-xylosidase failed to cleave the substrate at pH 5 or pH 6 (S3B Fig). Further testing of this putative microbial β-xylosidase will require mutagenesis to improve protein solubility and increase yield. Isolation and characterization of a putative endo-1,4-β-xylanase We successfully purified the putative endo-1,4-β-xylanase from cell lysates using the protein production and isolation protocol described above (Fig 6A). Enzyme activity was assessed using 6-chloro-4-methylumbelliferyl xylobioside (CMU-X2) substrate and a modified protocol developed by Hallam and Withers [22]. When cleaved by an active enzyme, CMU is released from xylobiose, causing fluorescence emission. CMU-X2 (100 μM) was combined with 0.6 micrograms of purified putative endo-1,4-β-xylanase across a range of pH values. Immediately upon addition of enzyme, the fluorophore was excited at 365 nm and emission was read at 450 nm; one measurement was taken every minute for 30 minutes. The increase in raw fluorescence units (RFUs) over time reported cleavage of CMU-X2 substrate by the putative endo-1,4-β-xylanase; this reaction was catalyzed most efficiently at pH 7 (Fig 6B). The DesR β-glucosidase served as a negative control in these assays and did not cleave the CMU-X2 substrate (S4 Fig). 10.1371/journal.pone.0209221.g006Fig 6Characterization of endo-1,4- β-xylanase.A) Putative endo-1,4-β-xylanase was purified by 6xHis purification. B) 0.6 μg of endo-1,4-β-xylanase was combined with 100 μM of CMU-X2 to assess enzyme activity at different pH values. Samples were assessed via fluorescence in sodium citrate buffer (pH 4, 5, 5.5, 6) or sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6.5, 7, 7.5). A reading of raw fluorescent units (450 nm) was taken every minute for 30 minutes at 37°C. C) Relative activity of endo-1,4-β-xylanase at different pH levels compared to pH 7. D) Thermostability of endo-1,4-β-xylanase was assessed. Samples containing 0.6 μg of endo-1,4-β-xylanase in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer were incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C, 50°C, 60°C, or 70°C before addition of 100 μM of CMU-X2 and fluorescence detection. Control is unincubated endo-1,4-β-xylanase. E) Michaelis-Menten plot was generated with initial reaction rate against substrate concentrations above at 37°C, pH 7. F) Lineweaver-Burk plot was used to generate kinetic constants KM, Vmax, and kcat. Characterization of endo-1,4- β-xylanase. A) Putative endo-1,4-β-xylanase was purified by 6xHis purification. B) 0.6 μg of endo-1,4-β-xylanase was combined with 100 μM of CMU-X2 to assess enzyme activity at different pH values. Samples were assessed via fluorescence in sodium citrate buffer (pH 4, 5, 5.5, 6) or sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6.5, 7, 7.5). A reading of raw fluorescent units (450 nm) was taken every minute for 30 minutes at 37°C. C) Relative activity of endo-1,4-β-xylanase at different pH levels compared to pH 7. D) Thermostability of endo-1,4-β-xylanase was assessed. Samples containing 0.6 μg of endo-1,4-β-xylanase in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer were incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C, 50°C, 60°C, or 70°C before addition of 100 μM of CMU-X2 and fluorescence detection. Control is unincubated endo-1,4-β-xylanase. E) Michaelis-Menten plot was generated with initial reaction rate against substrate concentrations above at 37°C, pH 7. F) Lineweaver-Burk plot was used to generate kinetic constants KM, Vmax, and kcat. To investigate the thermostability of the putative endo-1,4-β-xylanase, we incubated samples containing 0.6 micrograms of purified enzyme for 30 minutes at 37°C, 50°C, 60°C, or 70°C before conducting an in vitro CMU-X2 cleavage assay as described above. Enzyme activity was abolished after 30-minute incubation at any of these temperatures (Fig 6D). A Michaelis-Menten plot was generated for endo-1,4-β-xylanase activity over a range of CMU-X2 concentrations (Fig 6E). From this, kinetic constants for endo-1,4-β-xylanase were calculated using a Lineweaver-Burk double reciprocal plot (Fig 6F). Endo-1,4-β-xylanase had a calculated KM value of 32.005 ± 4.72 μM for CMU-X2 and a Vmax of 1.16x10-5 ± 3.55x10-7 M/s. The calculated turnover number (kcat) for endo-1,4-β-xylanase was found to be 94.7 s-1. Finally, kcat/KM was calculated to be 2.96x106 M-1s-1.