Results Lymphopenia and recovery of T-lymphocyte numbers after sepsis T lymphocytes undergo apoptosis in both septic animals [13] or patients [11,34,35]. To determine the quality and kinetics of T-lymphocyte recovery after experimental sepsis we examined T lymphocytes in the secondary lymphatic organs of mice for 3.5 months after sepsis induction in the PCI model. In addition, mice were randomly allocated to the IL-7 treatment group, which was treated subcutaneously with 2.5 μg recombinant human IL-7 daily from d5–9 post sepsis induction, or the control group, which received no further treatment. As described earlier [16], the mortality within the first five days after sepsis induction was >40%. Thereafter mortality was approximately 10% within the following 30 days and similar in IL-7 treated or non-treated mice throughout observation period of 3.5 months. In sham-treated mice the total number of cells in the spleen did not change during the first four weeks of observation. At d113 the number of cells was significantly lower (p <0.005), compatible with the known effects of aging in mice [36–38] (Fig 1A). In septic mice there was a dramatic decrease of spleen cells at day d3 after sepsis induction. Thereafter, cell numbers quickly recovered and were even significantly higher than in sham mice at d8 after sepsis induction. IL-7 treatment from d5-9 resulted in significantly higher spleen cell numbers as compared with non-treated septic mice only at the very late time point (d113) after sepsis induction (Fig 1A). 10.1371/journal.pone.0211716.g001Fig 1The loss of T lymphocytes in acute sepsis is followed by a rapid and sustained increase in T-lymphocyte numbers.Mice were injected with PBS i.p. (sham) or subjected to sepsis induction (PCI) or sepsis-induction plus IL-7 treatment (PCI + IL-7). At the indicated time points between d3 and d113 after PCI at least 6 mice per group were sacrificed and splenic cell numbers determined. (A) absolute cell numbers and frequencies of CD3+ T lymphocytes in the spleen; (B) numbers and frequencies of CD4+ and CD8+ subpopulations of CD3+ T lymphocytes in the spleen. The loss of T lymphocytes in acute sepsis is followed by a rapid and sustained increase in T-lymphocyte numbers. Mice were injected with PBS i.p. (sham) or subjected to sepsis induction (PCI) or sepsis-induction plus IL-7 treatment (PCI + IL-7). At the indicated time points between d3 and d113 after PCI at least 6 mice per group were sacrificed and splenic cell numbers determined. (A) absolute cell numbers and frequencies of CD3+ T lymphocytes in the spleen; (B) numbers and frequencies of CD4+ and CD8+ subpopulations of CD3+ T lymphocytes in the spleen. The frequency (Fig 1A) and number (Fig 1B) of CD3+ T lymphocytes in the spleen was nearly constant in the sham mice during the observation period. In septic mice, a reduction of CD3+ T lymphocytes occurred at d3 after sepsis induction as expected [13]. Numbers and frequencies of T lymphocytes quickly recovered thereafter and were similar to those in sham-treated mice from d8 through d113 (Fig 1B). In contrast, the initial loss of lymphocytes was more than compensated in IL-7 treated septic mice, which harboured significantly more CD3+ cells in their spleen compared with sham mice d8 after sepsis induction (Fig 1B). This increase was still detectable, however no longer significant, at d28 and at d113, when the numbers and frequencies of T lymphocytes were similar in all three groups (Fig 1B). The percentage and number of CD3+CD4-CD8-T lymphocytes was strongly increased in sepsis-surviving mice at day 8 after PCI with or without IL-7 treatment (see also [16]). Moreover, there was a massive increase in CD3+CD8+ T cells after sepsis in the IL-7 treated mice (Fig 1B). The numbers and frequencies of CD4+ T cells largely reflected the number and frequencies of all T lymphocytes: a massive drop at d3 after sepsis induction was followed by a rapid reconstitution while no significant difference in CD4+ T cell numbers between the three groups of mice was recognised. Recovery of naive and effector T cells after sepsis The survival and homeostasis of naive and effector T cells are controlled by different mechanisms [39,40]. We examined the long-term consequences of sepsis on CD4+ and CD8+ naive (CD62Lhi CD44-) and effector/memory (CD44+CD62Llo or +) T lymphocytes (Fig 2A). At d8, both the number and the percentage of naive CD4+ T cells were significantly lower in septic mice than in sham-mice, regardless of whether the septic mice were IL-7 treated or not (Fig 2B). In septic mice, numbers and frequencies of naive CD4+ T cells quickly recovered thereafter and were not significantly different from those in control mice. In IL-7-treated septic mice the recovery of naive CD4+ T cells occurred faster than in the septic mice that had not received IL-7. 113 days after sepsis induction the numbers and frequency of naive CD4+ T cells were similar in all three groups of mice. Immediately after sepsis, at day 8 after PCI, the number of CD8+ T cells was significantly higher in the IL-7 treated septic mice than in the two other groups (Fig 2C). This was almost exclusively due to a significantly higher number and frequency of CD8+ effector memory cells in the IL-7 treated mice. At d28 after PCI the number of CD8+ T cells was still significantly higher in the IL-7 treated group of septic mice, again mostly due to an increase in effector/memory cells. At d113 post PCI the frequency and numbers of CD8+ effector/memory cells were significantly higher in the IL-7 treated group compared with the sham-treated mice. Taken together, the numbers and frequencies of CD4+ and CD8+ naive and effector/memory cells quickly recovered and there were no significant differences among the three groups of mice except for a higher number and frequency of CD8+ effector/memory cells in IL-7 treated septic mice. 10.1371/journal.pone.0211716.g002Fig 2Recovery of naive and effector/memory T lymphocytes after sepsis.Mice were injected with PBS i.p. (Sham) or subjected to sepsis induction (PCI) or sepsis-induction plus IL-7 treatment (PCI + IL-7). At the indicated time points between d8 and d113 after PCI at least 6 mice per group were sacrificed and spleen cells analyzed by flow cytometry. (A) CD3+CD4+ T cells and CD3+CD8+ T cells were analyzed for their expression of CD62L and CD44 and categorized as naive cells (CD62LhiCD44-) or effector/memory cells (CD44+CD62L- or CD44+CD62L+). (B-C) Longitudinal analysis of numbers and frequencies of (B) naive and effector/memory CD4+ T cells or (C) naive and effector/memory CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. Recovery of naive and effector/memory T lymphocytes after sepsis. Mice were injected with PBS i.p. (Sham) or subjected to sepsis induction (PCI) or sepsis-induction plus IL-7 treatment (PCI + IL-7). At the indicated time points between d8 and d113 after PCI at least 6 mice per group were sacrificed and spleen cells analyzed by flow cytometry. (A) CD3+CD4+ T cells and CD3+CD8+ T cells were analyzed for their expression of CD62L and CD44 and categorized as naive cells (CD62LhiCD44-) or effector/memory cells (CD44+CD62L- or CD44+CD62L+). (B-C) Longitudinal analysis of numbers and frequencies of (B) naive and effector/memory CD4+ T cells or (C) naive and effector/memory CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. Sepsis causes a transient reduction in thymic output Our data thus far have shown that the overall number of T lymphocytes as well as the CD4+ and CD8+ subpopulations including the naive T cells have largely returned to normal values 3.5 months after sepsis. The recovery of T cell populations could be due to increased thymic output after sepsis or to homeostatic proliferation of those T cell clones which survived during sepsis. We used RAG2p-GFP transgenic mice [30] to examine thymic output after sepsis (Fig 3A). In these mice the RAG2 promoter drives green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression and the GFP signal remains detectable for some time even after the RAG gene is no longer expressed [41]. In accordance with the literature [42] approximately 20% of the CD4+ T cells in the spleen of sham mice were recent thymic emigrants (RTEs); at d113 this frequency was slightly lower at 15% (Fig 3B). The percentage of CD4+ RTEs was reduced to approximately 11% in septic mice at d3 and d8 after PCI. Given that cell numbers were similar in septic and sham mice at d8, the reduced percentage of RTEs indicates homeostatic proliferation of surviving clones. The number of RTEs slowly increased thereafter and the difference between sham mice and septic mice was no longer significant at d28 and d113 after PCI. The treatment of septic mice with IL-7 did not have a significant impact on the number of CD4+ RTEs (Fig 3B). Regarding the frequency of CD8+ RTEs there was no significant difference between septic mice and controls at any time point (Fig 3C). IL-7 treatment did not influence the number of CD8+ RTEs (Fig 3C). 10.1371/journal.pone.0211716.g003Fig 3Repopulation of the peripheral T cell pool by recent thymic emigrants (RTEs) after sepsis.B6.Rag2-GFP mice were injected with PBS i.p. (sham) or subjected to sepsis induction (PCI) or sepsis induction plus IL-7 treatment (PCI + IL-7). At the indicated time points between d3 and d113 after PCI, at least 6 mice per group were sacrificed and spleen cells analyzed by flow cytometry. (A) RTEs within the CD4+ or CD8+ lymphocyte population were identified by their expression of green fluorescent protein. (B, C) Longitudinal analysis of numbers and frequencies of RTEs among (B) T cells or RTEs among (C) cytotoxic T cells. Repopulation of the peripheral T cell pool by recent thymic emigrants (RTEs) after sepsis. B6.Rag2-GFP mice were injected with PBS i.p. (sham) or subjected to sepsis induction (PCI) or sepsis induction plus IL-7 treatment (PCI + IL-7). At the indicated time points between d3 and d113 after PCI, at least 6 mice per group were sacrificed and spleen cells analyzed by flow cytometry. (A) RTEs within the CD4+ or CD8+ lymphocyte population were identified by their expression of green fluorescent protein. (B, C) Longitudinal analysis of numbers and frequencies of RTEs among (B) T cells or RTEs among (C) cytotoxic T cells. Next generation sequencing (NGS) reveals no global decrease in T-cell receptor (TCR)-repertoire diversity in post-septic mice We next asked whether the transient reduction in thymic output resulted in a less diverse TCR repertoire in mice that had survived sepsis. To obtain a more detailed picture of TCR diversity we used next generation sequencing for high-throughput analyses of the TCR-repertoires. First, we examined the clonal composition of CD3+ T lymphocytes by determining the distribution of CDR3 lengths (spectratyping). Gaussian distributions of CDR3 lengths were observed d8 (Fig 4A) and d28 (Fig 4B) after PCI. To assess T-cell receptor diversity we chose the percentage of unique clonotypes in 50.000 cDNAs generated from individual mice, which has been demonstrated to correlate strongly with other widely used approaches e.g. the Shannon-Wiener index or the Chao1 index [43]. At all analyzed time points the percentage of individual clonotypes in unsorted T cells varied between 50 and 70% and there was no significant difference between the three groups of mice (Fig 4C). To examine further if there was preferential clonal outgrowth after sepsis we analyzed the portion of the repertoire occupied by the 100 most frequently occurring TCR sequences at d8, d28 and d113 after PCI. Similar to earlier findings [43], the share of the 100 top-frequency clonotypes was 4–10% with no significant differences between the three groups or time-points (Fig 4D). Taken together, global analyses of TCR transcript diversity did not reveal significant differences between control mice and septic mice that had either received IL-7 treatment or not. 10.1371/journal.pone.0211716.g004Fig 4Analyses of TCR diversity after sepsis.Mice were injected with PBS i.p. (sham) or subjected to sepsis induction (PCI) or sepsis-induction plus IL-7 treatment (PCI + IL-7). At the indicated time points between d8 and d113 after PCI at least 4 mice per group were sacrificed, the spleens were harvested and TCRs were sequenced and analyzed as described in Materials and Methods. (A) CDR3 length (nucleotides) of T cells at day 8 after PCI. (B) CDR3 length (amino acids) of T cells at day 28 after PCI. (C) percentage of unique clones among all TCR transcripts analyzed. (D) Percentage of the 100 most frequently occurring clonotypes among all TCR transcripts analyzed. Analyses of TCR diversity after sepsis. Mice were injected with PBS i.p. (sham) or subjected to sepsis induction (PCI) or sepsis-induction plus IL-7 treatment (PCI + IL-7). At the indicated time points between d8 and d113 after PCI at least 4 mice per group were sacrificed, the spleens were harvested and TCRs were sequenced and analyzed as described in Materials and Methods. (A) CDR3 length (nucleotides) of T cells at day 8 after PCI. (B) CDR3 length (amino acids) of T cells at day 28 after PCI. (C) percentage of unique clones among all TCR transcripts analyzed. (D) Percentage of the 100 most frequently occurring clonotypes among all TCR transcripts analyzed. Blunted T-cell responses against fungal antigen in mice that had survived sepsis Secondary infections, including fungal infections, contribute significantly to sepsis mortality. Efficient T-cell responses against pathogens do not only rely on a broad TCR repertoire but also on the swift induction of the appropriate effector functions. We, therefore, analyzed the T cell response against the Aspergillus antigen gliotoxin sulfhydryl oxidase (GliT) [33]. Thirty days after sepsis induction mice were immunized with GliT in CFA s.c.. Seven days later, the mice were sacrificed and the T cell response to GLiT was assayed by determination of CD154 expression after a brief (6 hr) period of in vitro restimulation with GliT (Fig 5A). Compared with sham mice the percentage and numbers of CD154+ GliT-specific CD4+ T helper cells was significantly reduced in the spleen of septic mice regardless of whether they had received IL-7 treatment or not (Fig 5B and 5C). Thus, the number of GliT-specific Th cells was significantly blunted in mice that had survived sepsis despite the fact that these mice had no obvious reduction in TCR-repertoire diversity (Fig 4). We next examined the cytokine production of GliT-specific Th cells. The frequencies of IFN-γ-, IL-17-, GM-CSF-, TNF-α, or IL-10-producing cells among the CD4+CD154+Th cells was similar in all three groups of mice (Fig 5C). Moreover, the frequencies of CD4+CD154+ GliT-specific Th cells that produced more than one cytokine in response to GliT was similar in all three groups of mice (Fig 5D). Therefore, whereas the number of GliT-specific Th cells was significantly reduced in mice that had survived sepsis, the cytokine-producing capacity within this diminished pool of cells remained intact. 10.1371/journal.pone.0211716.g005Fig 5Impaired Th-cell response to fungal antigen after sepsis.Mice were injected with PBS i.p. (sham) or subjected to sepsis induction (PCI) or sepsis-induction plus IL-7 treatment (PCI + IL-7). 30 days after sepsis induction at least 5 mice from each group were immunized subcutaneously with the Aspergillus protein antigen GliT in complete Freund’s adjuvant. Seven days later the mice were sacrificed and the spleens were harvested. (A) Upon brief ex vivo culture with the antigen, GliT-specific Th cells were identified by flowcytometry using T cell-characteristic FSC/SSC criteria, doublet exclusion, exclusion of dead cells via fixable dead cell dye, and by simultaneous expression of CD4 and CD154. (B) Percentages of CD154+ among CD4+ cells and (C) total number of CD154+CD4+ cells. (D) Frequencies of cytokine-producing GliT-specific Th cells among CD154+CD4+ cells. (E) Frequencies of polyfunctional GliT-specific Th cells were analyzed by boolean gating on TNF-, IFNγ - and IL-17-producing cells. Impaired Th-cell response to fungal antigen after sepsis. Mice were injected with PBS i.p. (sham) or subjected to sepsis induction (PCI) or sepsis-induction plus IL-7 treatment (PCI + IL-7). 30 days after sepsis induction at least 5 mice from each group were immunized subcutaneously with the Aspergillus protein antigen GliT in complete Freund’s adjuvant. Seven days later the mice were sacrificed and the spleens were harvested. (A) Upon brief ex vivo culture with the antigen, GliT-specific Th cells were identified by flowcytometry using T cell-characteristic FSC/SSC criteria, doublet exclusion, exclusion of dead cells via fixable dead cell dye, and by simultaneous expression of CD4 and CD154. (B) Percentages of CD154+ among CD4+ cells and (C) total number of CD154+CD4+ cells. (D) Frequencies of cytokine-producing GliT-specific Th cells among CD154+CD4+ cells. (E) Frequencies of polyfunctional GliT-specific Th cells were analyzed by boolean gating on TNF-, IFNγ - and IL-17-producing cells.