RESULTS Pipeline development and input data. As a starting point, we were interested in creating a pipeline for identifying clusters containing possible resistance genes from whole-genome sequencing data. In order to do this, we based the pipeline on the assumption that the resistance gene is found within a cluster and is a copy, a paralog, of an essential gene found elsewhere in the genome. For testing, we used published complete and draft-quality fungal genome sequences. The input for the pipeline was chosen to be three different types of data derived from the genome sequence data: (i) predicted genes/proteins and functionally annotated proteins (for functional annotation, we used InterPro [19, 20]), (ii) predictions of secondary metabolite gene clusters (for this purpose, we used a reimplementation of the fungus-optimized SMURF algorithm [21], as described previously by Vesth et al. [6]), and (iii) groups of homologous protein sequences (we used a pipeline designed for Aspergillus data, creating homologous protein families based on single linkages of bidirectional BLASTp hits [as described in reference 6]). It is assumed that proteins with similar, although not necessarily identical, functions will be clustered into the same protein family. For our purpose, this is useful, as resistance and target genes will be grouped into one family. As an extensive test data set, we used 51 Penicillium and Aspergillus species containing a total of 3,276 predicted clusters and 26,551 secondary metabolite genes. In order to identify the most likely candidate clusters containing potential resistance genes, the pipeline includes a number of filtration steps (Fig. 2). Several of these are designed to deal with and/or minimize the effect of possible errors in assembly and annotation due to either inherent errors in sequencing technologies and predictions or errors caused by the assembly and sequence quality of draft genomes. Instead of attempting to correct these errors in the sequence or annotation, we attempt to mitigate their effect by creating filtering steps. Besides mitigating annotation and sequencing errors, the filtering steps are also implemented to deal with biological diversity and differences. FIG 2Overview of the pipeline illustrating the initial data of predicted secondary metabolite gene clusters and homologous protein families. In step 1, the initial data are combined to generate counts of how many homologs are found in each organisms and how many are within predicted clusters. In step 2, clusters are selected based on specific homology count patterns, either “strict,” where only one gene can have a homolog outside the cluster, or “alternative,” where genes belonging to large protein families are allowed. Step 3 is filtering of the selected clusters based on other clusters having a homologous resistance gene; this step is optional. In step 4, filtering based on the majority of the organisms should provide a homolog of the resistance/target genes. Step 5 is filtering based on the number of organism that should have only a single homolog. Overview of the pipeline illustrating the initial data of predicted secondary metabolite gene clusters and homologous protein families. In step 1, the initial data are combined to generate counts of how many homologs are found in each organisms and how many are within predicted clusters. In step 2, clusters are selected based on specific homology count patterns, either “strict,” where only one gene can have a homolog outside the cluster, or “alternative,” where genes belonging to large protein families are allowed. Step 3 is filtering of the selected clusters based on other clusters having a homologous resistance gene; this step is optional. In step 4, filtering based on the majority of the organisms should provide a homolog of the resistance/target genes. Step 5 is filtering based on the number of organism that should have only a single homolog. The strategy of the pipeline is thus to identify clusters containing resistance genes, assuming that the resistance genes are copies of essential genes. In this context, an essential gene is defined as a gene that has homologs in all the species included in the analysis. Steps 1 and 2: identification of the number of homologs for cluster genes. The first step in the pipeline is to couple precomputed homolog protein families to the predicted cluster genes (Fig. 2, step 1). Following this, the number of homologs, the homology count, for each secondary metabolite gene in each organism/genome is identified. In addition, the numbers of homologs found in predicted clusters are recorded. Next, clusters with potential resistance genes are selected based on a specific pattern of homology counts (Fig. 2, step 2). In this step, the user can select various levels of stringency for the selection pattern. The most strict and simple selection pattern (Fig. 2, step 2, left) identifies clusters where only one of the genes has a homolog in the genome. It can have only one such homolog, and this homolog must not be part of another cluster. The gene with the homolog in the cluster is the presumed resistance gene, and the homolog outside the cluster is the presumed target gene. Using this selection criterion on our test data set (see Table S1 in the supplemental material, which includes GenBank accession numbers), 262 clusters were identified and divided into 141 potential resistance genes protein families (Table 1). This corresponds to 8% of the total clusters in the data set. Number of cases after each filtering step using various settingsa Step No. of cases. Strict Alternative (X = 2) Alternative (X = 3). 2 141 255 202. 3 45 88 67. 4 19/14 38/25 32/22. 4* 70/43 99/57 89/54. 5 6/4 22/15 12/8. 5* 31/16 59/33 41/22. The columns represent three different cluster selection criteria at step 2, where “Strict” is the most conservative and “Alternative” (X = 2 and X = 3) is where the protein families are larger than 2 or 3 times the total number of organisms allowed in the cluster but not considered potential resistance genes. The rows represent each of the steps in the pipeline, and * indicates that step 3 was skipped. After step 4, the two numbers indicate that the resistance protein family has to have homologs in 90%/98% of the organisms in the data set in step 4. Species used in this study, showing species name, section, and link to the JGI pages with the genomes. Download Table S1, CSV file, 0.00 MB. This “strict” selection pattern is very restrictive: if any of the other cluster genes have a homolog anywhere in the genome, the cluster will be filtered away. Many clusters contain tailoring enzymes with common functions, such as P450 or methyltransferases; these can be thought of as “household” functions in secondary metabolism. Clusters with common tailoring functions will frequently have several homologs, resulting in high homology counts, and the cluster will therefore fall out of the strict selection pattern, which may not be what the user wants. Another effect of the filtering is that the selected clusters often contain fewer genes (average size of 6.4 genes versus 8.2 genes for the total data set). The larger the cluster, the more likely it is that there are several genes with homologs in the genome. It is likely that clusters containing potential resistance genes are missed due to the strict selection criteria. Conversely, the share of bioactive clusters is increased after the selection. Alternative cluster selection pattern. We wanted to create an alternative selection pattern to allow the presence of more tailoring enzymes and larger cluster sizes. As a method to do this, we added an analysis of the genes in the clusters. The most common InterPro domains (annotated in at least 1,000 cluster genes) were selected, the protein families belonging to each InterPro domain were identified, and the sizes of the protein families were noted. Here, we see that in our data set, the protein families belonging to each InterPro domain range in size from 1 to 475 proteins (Fig. S1). Common InterPro domains in secondary metabolism. Shown is visualization of the most common InterPro annotations of secondary metabolite genes (found in more than 1,000 secondary metabolite proteins) and the size of the protein families. Two horizontal lines indicate the recommended protein family size cutoffs where Xinput is 2 (102 proteins) and 3 (153 proteins). Download FIG S1, PDF file, 0.2 MB. When protein families with several homologs in each organism appear in a cluster, the cluster will be discarded using the strict selection pattern. To avoid this, an “alternative” selection pattern was created to disregard large protein families as potential resistance genes and instead allow the proteins belonging to large protein families to have homologs in the organism (Fig. 2, step 2, right). The size of the protein families will change depending on the data (e.g., the number of genomes included and how closely related the species are). The selection was therefore designed to be dependent on the number of organisms in the data set: if the protein family is larger than the total number of organisms in the data set multiplied by X, where X is a user input, then the gene is ignored as a potential resistance gene; e.g., if X is set to 2, the cutoff would be 2 times 5 organisms (Fig. 2, step 2). As the protein family illustrated has 11 members, it would be allowed in the pattern. If a value of 3 is selected, the cutoff would be 12, and the illustrated protein family is not large enough and this cluster would be eliminated. In our test set, we used a value of 2 or 3 as the user input (X), thereby disregarding protein families with more than 102 or 153 members, respectively. With these selection criteria, 482 clusters (X = 2) and 388 clusters (X = 3) are identified, respectively, corresponding to 84% and 48% increases compared to the initial strict selection criteria (Table 1). Across these clusters, there are 255 and 202 different potential resistance gene families, corresponding to increases of 81% and 43%, respectively, showing that the strict measurement is indeed sensitive to large protein families. Step 3: filtering for resistance genes found in more than one cluster. A filtering step is implemented in order to mitigate cluster prediction errors (Fig. 2, step 3). Cluster prediction algorithms are sensitive to the surrounding genes, but the inclusion of multiple genomes mitigates this problem. Therefore, we have included the option for FRIGG to return only clusters where at least one other identified cluster has a potential resistance gene belonging to the same protein family. Thereby, the members of the potential resistance gene protein family have to be found in at least two clusters, across multiple genomes. Using these filtering criteria, 45, 88, and 67 of the previously identified potential resistance gene protein families are left for the strict pattern, the alternative pattern where X equals 2, and the alternative pattern where X equals 3, which correspond to 32 to 35% of the initial selected potential resistance gene cases (Table 1). As this is conservative, we have allowed for the user to skip this step. Step 4: filtering for clusters targeting essential proteins. It is an underlying assumption that the target of the compound produced by the cluster should preferentially have an essential function, and thus, it should have protein members in all the species. By extension, the protein family in which the resistance proteins are found should therefore also be found in all genomes in the set. Here, we employ this definition of essential (present in all genomes) to allow for uncharacterized essential genes. The addition of a filtering step to eliminate clusters where the resistance gene is not duplicating an essential protein family has two purposes: first, it makes it more likely that it is a resistance gene if there are homologs in all species, and second, it will be a more widely useful bioactive compound if the target is conserved in many species. The implementation of the filtering step removes clusters where the putative resistance genes have homologs in fewer than 90 to 100% of the organisms (Fig. 2, step 4). The possibility of choosing values lower than 100% was implemented to allow for some data and prediction errors, such as incomplete genomes and imperfect gene annotations. Another reason for choosing a value lower than 100% is to allow some species to have a different mechanism and, thus, not the target gene. We examined the effects of selecting 98% and 90% of the genomes (Table 1, step 4). Overall, the numbers of predicted resistance genes drop considerably, to fewer than one-half of those in step 3 with a 90% cutoff and fewer than one-third with a 98% cutoff. As mentioned above, step 3 is conservative and optional. If step 3 is skipped and the essentiality filter is applied (Table 1, step 4*), fewer than half are retained for the 90% cutoff and around one-fourth are retained for the 98% cutoff. Step 5: filtering the number of organisms with single copies. The final filtering step is related to the organisms in which the putative resistance genes have homologs. The assumption here is that the target gene should be a single essential gene and, therefore, that the majority of the species should have only a single copy. This filtering step therefore removes protein families where more than 50% of the genomes have more than one homolog of the putative resistance gene (Fig. 2, step 5). This step is also optional. The effect of adding this selection criteria can be seen in Table 1 (steps 5 and 5*). Pipeline output. The primary output of this pipeline is a list of protein families with potential resistance genes and fasta files containing all the proteins belonging to the identified family. The header of each entry includes the name of the organism, the section to which it belongs, the protein identification, the number of copies found in the organism, and whether it is in a selected cluster (StrictClust), a predicted cluster (Clust), or somewhere else in the genome (0), which is followed by the amino acid sequence. If high experimental capacity is available, one option is to test all these cases; if the experimental capacity is limited, further analysis is needed to evaluate and select which cases to work with. In this example, with 51 species, we obtain 12 different outputs after step 5 using each of the various settings (Table 1). Starting from 3,276 clusters, we compare the outputs of all 12 settings and can combine them into 72 unique putative resistance gene families (Table S2). Four of these are found in every analysis, while 19 are found only once using a specific set of variables. Overview of the 72 identified putative resistance gene families and the parameters with which they were identified. Each row represent a protein family, the columns represent the various settings, and “1” indicates that a protein in the protein family was identified as a potential resistance gene using these settings. Download Table S2, CSV file, 0.00 MB. With each filtering step, the number of clusters and putative resistance genes decreases, but the share of likely bioactive clusters and resistance genes increases. Computer-assisted curation for potential bioactive clusters. Even with the above-described selection criteria, the pipeline still produces more candidate clusters than would be feasible for most academic laboratories to verify experimentally. Once the pipeline has been run and potential resistance gene cases have been identified, further analysis is needed to select the most promising candidates for experimental verification. In order to do this efficiently, we use a combination of principal-component analysis (PCA), phylogenetic analysis, functional annotation, and comparison to the NCBI database using BLASTp in order to gain more knowledge about the potential cases (examples of the PCA and phylogenetic trees can be seen in Fig. 3 and in Fig. S2 and S3 in the supplemental material). FIG 3Phylogenetic tree and principal-component analysis of protein family 596635, including the fellutamide B resistance gene. (A) Phylogenetic tree of the protein family (596635) containing the fellutamide B resistance gene (protein identification 2700) from A. nidulans. The phylogenetic tree is a maximum likelihood tree and was created with 500 bootstraps. (B) Principal-component analysis of protein family 596635 containing the fellutamide B resistance gene (protein identification 2700) from A. nidulans. The panels to the left are colored based on the sections to which the proteins belong, while the panels to the right are colored based on if the protein is a putative resistance gene (StrictClust), in a predicted cluster (Clust), a target not in a cluster (0), and the homolog to the putative resistance gene (putative target) (outsideSC). Phylogenetic tree and principal-component analysis of protein family 596635, including the fellutamide B resistance gene. (A) Phylogenetic tree of the protein family (596635) containing the fellutamide B resistance gene (protein identification 2700) from A. nidulans. The phylogenetic tree is a maximum likelihood tree and was created with 500 bootstraps. (B) Principal-component analysis of protein family 596635 containing the fellutamide B resistance gene (protein identification 2700) from A. nidulans. The panels to the left are colored based on the sections to which the proteins belong, while the panels to the right are colored based on if the protein is a putative resistance gene (StrictClust), in a predicted cluster (Clust), a target not in a cluster (0), and the homolog to the putative resistance gene (putative target) (outsideSC). Principal-component analysis of protein family 597268 containing two potential resistance genes (protein identifications 11595 and 32200) found in A. oryzae and A. flavus. The panels to the left are colored based on the sections to which the proteins belong, while the panels to the right are colored based on if the protein is found in a selected cluster (StrictClust) (green), not in a cluster (0) (blue), and the homolog of the ones found in selected clusters (outsideSC) (yellow). Download FIG S2, PDF file, 0.7 MB. Phylogenetic tree of protein family 597268 containing two potential resistance genes (protein identifications 11595 and 32200) found in A. oryzae and A. flavus. The node labels show bootstrap values based on 500 bootstraps. The tip labels have the species name, the section, protein identification, the number of homologs in the species, and an indication of whether it is found in a selected cluster (StrictClust), in a predicted cluster (Clust), not in a cluster (0) and the homolog of the ones found in selected clusters (outsideSC). Download FIG S3, PDF file, 0.2 MB. The functional annotation and BLAST analysis are included to examine whether a potential resistance gene has a known function, if the function is essential, and if it would be a good drug target. The PCA and phylogenetic trees are used to illustrate the evolutionary relationship between the proteins in the protein family. Resistance genes are expected to be a duplication of a target gene that is essential. Essential genes are under similar evolutionary pressures in all the species and are therefore closely related. The resistance gene, however, is under a different selection pressure, potentially expressed under a different subset of conditions, which is expected to be reflected in the sequence and, hence, the analysis, where resistance genes should form a separate group in the PCA or a separate clade in the tree compared to the target genes. Another thing which can be considered is the synteny of the clusters, whether the order and functions of the genes are conserved when comparing clusters identified in two species. This can be used to evaluate cluster borders and similarity, but it requires at least two species to have similar clusters, which is not always the case. Examination of verified clusters. As mentioned in the introduction, there are some known clusters in fungi containing a verified resistance gene using this mechanism. These include the mycophenolic acid cluster in P. brevicompactum and the fellutamide B cluster from A. nidulans. Both clusters were included in this study as validation controls to check if the known resistance genes would be identified using our pipeline. The fellutamide B cluster is identified in all the outputs where step 3 was skipped, since this was the only cluster with this resistance gene and the selected homology count pattern. Thus, when filtering for replication of the pattern (step 3), it falls out of the analysis. One hypothesis was that the potential resistance and target genes are exposed to different evolutionary pressures. This is expected to be reflected in the evolutionary pattern, where the essential target genes (under high pressure) will be closely related, whereas the resistance genes will show more variation. To investigate if this is the case, and to provide an example of the curation process, a phylogenetic tree and a PCA were performed for the protein family containing the fellutamide B resistance gene (protein family 596635) (Fig. 3). The PCA shows a clear distinction between the resistance genes found in clusters (Fig. 3B, red) and the other essential target genes (Fig. 3B, blue). The phylogenetic tree (Fig. 3A) shows two clear groupings: one large closely related group with all the target genes (blue) and one small group containing the resistance gene (red). The target genes are ordered in their phylogenetic groups, so species from the same section group together. The resistance gene from A. nidulans is grouped with a protein from Aspergillus sydowii and A. versicolor, both of which are found in clusters, indicating that they most likely also function as resistance genes and potentially can produce fellutamide B or a derivative or a different compound attacking the same target. A. versicolor is known to produce fellutamides C and F (22, 23), whereas A. sydowii, to our knowledge, has not been reported to produce derivatives of fellutamide. The clusters in A. versicolor and A. sydowii are similar to the A. nidulans fellutamide B cluster, with similar backbone enzymes (≥70%) and tailoring enzymes, but the A. versicolor and A. sydowii predicted clusters are larger, consisting of 19 genes, 7 more than in the A. nidulans cluster. Three of the extra genes have homologs in the genome and belong to small protein families, which is why these clusters are not identified in the first steps of the pipeline. Near the resistance genes in the phylogenetic tree, there are also three other genes, found in Aspergillus homomorphus, A. taichungensis, and A. candidus, which are extra copies of the target genes, but they are not predicted to be in clusters. These could be cluster prediction errors. We therefore investigated whether the three species have a cluster similar to the A. nidulans fellutamide B cluster, but no backbone genes had a BLASTp hit identity of >37%, indicating that they most likely cannot produce any derivatives of fellutamide. Another explanation for the extra copy could be that it functions in fellutamide resistance, which could be useful if the species naturally grow near fellutamide-producing species. The cluster of mycophenolic acid did not turn up in our outputs, so we investigated the cluster further to understand why. The predicted cluster containing the polyketide synthase (PKS) responsible for producing the core compound of mycophenolic acid consists of four genes: the PKS, a P450, a methyltransferase, and the resistance gene. The PKS and p450 are found in only one copy, and the resistance gene has one identified homolog, as expected. The methyltransferase, however, also has a homolog elsewhere in the genome. As the size of this protein family is only 23 members, it is not disregarded in the alternative pattern, and the cluster is filtered away in step 2. This shows that we lose some correct cases along the steps in the pipeline, which illustrates the importance of running the pipeline with multiple settings and inspecting the output carefully. The pipeline is sensitive to the number of organisms included, and the settings should be used while keeping this limitation in mind. Novel putative resistance gene. In addition to the known clusters with resistance genes, several uncharacterized clusters were also identified. Here, we focus on one example where the potential resistance gene is found in clusters in A. oryzae (protein identification 11595) and A. flavus (protein identification 32200) (protein family 597268). The PCA showed a very clear picture of the resistance genes falling outside the group of target genes; the same is seen in the phylogenetic tree, where the target genes also follow the expected phylogeny, with species from the same section grouping together (Fig. S2 and S3). Besides the identified putative resistance genes in Aspergillus oryzae and A. flavus, several other species (Aspergillus wentii, A. piperis, A. candidus, A. taichungensis, A. campestris, A. novofumigatus, and P. brevicompactum) have an additional gene, but these are not found in predicted clusters, suggesting that they have the resistance but not the biosynthesis. The predicted clusters in A. oryzae and A. flavus both consist of four genes: an acetyltransferase (InterPro accession numbers IPR000182 and IPR016181), the predicted resistance gene, a nonribosomal peptide synthetase-like synthetase, and a gene belonging to the major facilitator superfamily (InterPro accession number IPR011701). The putative resistance gene has annotations involved in “signal transduction response regulator, receiver region,” and “signal transduction histidine kinase, core” (InterPro accession numbers IPR001789 and IPR005467). Using BLASTp to investigate the function of the putative resistance gene, the top hits have functions such as “two-component osmosensing histidine kinase (Bos1)” (GenBank accession number RAQ55620.1). Based on this information, it seems likely that this is a cluster containing a previously unidentified resistance gene where the compound inhibits a conserved histidine kinase. In order to fully determine this, this will have to be experimentally validated in the future.