2. Results 2.1. Genes Involved in Gliotoxin Production are Downregulated by Zinc To understand the regulation of global gene expression by zinc in A. fumigatus, cDNA microarray analysis was performed. The cells were cultured in AMM-zinc plus 1 µM zinc and standard AMM to exponential phase, and total RNA was extracted. Standard AMM contains 77 µM zinc in the medium. We found that many genes involved in cellular metabolism were down- or upregulated by zinc. Among them, we found that the genes involved in gliotoxin biosynthesis were upregulated under zinc-deficient conditions. As shown in Figure 1, GliZ, GliA, GliT, and GtmA were upregulated under zinc-deficient conditions, and other genes were not detected in this experiment because of low expression levels. To confirm the cDNA microarray data, northern blot analysis was performed. The cells were cultured in AMM-zinc medium with 0 to 2 µM zinc, and total RNA was extracted. As shown in Figure 1B, the expression of GliZ, GliA, GliT, and GtmA was downregulated in a manner inversely proportional to the zinc concentration, and these results coincided with the microarray data. GliZ is a Zn2-Cys6 binuclear transcription factor that positively regulates gene expression involved in gliotoxin biosynthesis. To investigate the regulatory mechanism of GliZ gene expression by zinc, a ZafA deletion mutant was constructed, and the expression of the genes involved in gliotoxin biosynthesis was investigated. As shown in Figure 2A, the ZafA deletion mutant showed a growth defect in low-zinc and standard AMM media, and supplementation with zinc rescued the growth defect of the ΔzafA strain. Additionally, the introduction of ZafA into the ΔzafA strain rescued the growth defect of the ΔzafA strain. As shown in Figure 2B, northern blot analysis was performed with ΔzafA and ZafA-complemented strains. Each strain was cultured until the exponential phase, and total RNA was extracted. The gene expression of GliZ, GliT, GliA, and other gli cluster genes were decreased dramatically when ZafA was deleted, and the introduction of ZafA to the ΔzafA strain rescued the expression of GliZ, GliT, GliA, and other gli cluster genes. Furthermore, GliM, GliA, GliT and GliA gene expression was not detected in the GliZ deletion strain (Figure 2C). These data indicate that zinc regulates the expression of the genes involved in gliotoxin biosynthesis by regulating GliZ expression. To further investigate the regulatory mechanism of zinc on gliotoxin biosynthesis, gliotoxin production was measured from the cells of the wild type, ZafA deletion strain, and ZafA-complemented strain. As shown in Figure 3A, gliotoxin production was measured using HPLC, and extremely low production of gliotoxin was observed from the ZafA deletion strain (Figure S1). However, the ZafA-complemented strain showed even higher gliotoxin production than the wild-type cells. As shown in Figure 2B, the ZafA-complemented strain showed higher expression of gli cluster genes and gliotoxin production than the wild-type cells, and these results are thought to be due to the presence of the pyrG as the selectable marker of the ZafA-complemented strain and activating the expression of target gene. To investigate the involvement of zinc in gliotoxin biosynthesis, gliotoxin production was measured from cells cultured with different zinc concentrations. As shown in Figure 3B, the cells were cultured with the indicated zinc concentration, and the produced gliotoxin was measured (Figure S2). Interestingly, gliotoxin production was decreased in a manner inversely proportional to the zinc concentration, and this result coincided with the result of northern blot analysis, as shown in Figure 1B. The gliotoxin production from the GliZ deletion strain was measured (Figure S3), as shown in Figure 3C. 2.2. ZafA Binds to the Upstream Region of GliZ and Regulates Gliotoxin Biosynthesis To identify the mechanism of ZafA regulation of GliZ expression, we looked for the conserved ZafA-binding motif [23] in the upstream region of the GliZ gene. Interestingly, we found two conserved ZafA-binding motifs, 5′-CAAGGT-3′, from the −850 and −761 positions of the GliZ upstream region. To confirm the binding of ZafA to the ZafA-binding motifs of GliZ, mutagenesis was performed to remove the 5′-CAAGGT-3′ ZafA-binding motif from the upstream region of GliZ, as shown in Figure 4A, and a mutant strain was constructed. The −831-position mutant is M1, the −785-position mutant is M2, and the strain with mutations at both the −831 and −785 positions is M1M2. Mutagenesis had no effect on growth, as shown in Figure 4B. To investigate the effect of ZafA on GliZ expression in vitro, an ONPG assay was performed using a beta-galactosidase-fused system. Each upstream region of GliZ wild type and each mutant, M1, M2, and M1M2, was fused with the beta-galactosidase gene and subcloned into the yeast vector pRS425. The constructed vectors were cotransformed into yeast cells with a ZafA plasmid that expressed ZafA protein in yeast cells. Then, beta-galactosidase activity was measured. As shown in Figure 4C, although the wild-type upstream region of GliZ showed high beta-galactosidase activity when ZafA was also expressed, the M1M2 mutant showed the lowest beta-galactosidase activity. These results indicate that ZafA binds specifically to the GliZ upstream region. To investigate the regulation of GliZ by ZafA, northern blot analysis was performed with the mutant strains M1, M2, and M1M2. As shown in Figure 4D, the gene expression levels of GliZ, GliT, and GliA were downregulated in the M1M2 mutant, and this result showed the function of ZafA in gliotoxin biosynthesis. To further confirm the function of ZafA in GliZ expression, an EMSA was performed. ZafA protein was purified using a His-tagged form of ZafA from E. coli, and overexpressed recombinant ZafA was used in the EMSA. As shown in Figure 4E, the wild-type ZafA-binding motif and each mutant of GliZ were amplified and labeled with the 32P radioisotope. The ZafA protein bound strongly to the wild-type ZafA-binding motif, and a mobility shift was observed. An unlabeled wild-type ZafA-binding motif competed with the labeled ZafA-binding motif, and the addition of 350-fold excess of the cold ZafA-binding motif completely inhibited the mobility shift. However, the M1 and M2 mutants partially failed to compete with the ZafA-binding motif, and M1M2 completely failed to compete with the ZafA-binding motif. Furthermore, we measured gliotoxin production using the M1 and M2 mutants (Figure S4). As shown in Figure 4F, the indicated strains were cultured as described in the materials and methods section, and gliotoxin production was measured. Gliotoxin production was decreased when the ZafA-binding motif was mutated, and the M1M2 strain showed the lowest gliotoxin production, which coincided with the northern blot analyses, EMSAs, and ONPG assays. These results indicate that ZafA binds specifically to the ZafA-binding motifs of GliZ and regulates gene expression of GliZ and other gli cluster genes as well as ultimately regulating gliotoxin production. 2.3. ZafA Binding to the ZafA-Binding Motif of GliZ is a Virulence Factor Gliotoxin is a virulence factor, and strains defective in gliotoxin biosynthesis partially fail to infect hosts [36]. To identify the involvement of ZafA binding to the ZafA-binding motifs of GliZ in the pathogenesis of A. fumigatus, we performed a conidial killing assay with human macrophage and neutrophil cell lines. As shown in Figure 5, wild-type cells and mutant cells were infected with the indicated cell lines. The HL-60 differentiated macrophage cell line [37] was infected with wild-type and mutant strains, and a conidial killing assay was performed. M1 and M2 showed lower viability than wild type, and M1M2 showed the lowest viability among them. The same result was observed in the HL-60 differentiated neutrophil cell line [38]. To further confirm virulence defects, a murine virulence assay was performed. As shown in Figure 5C, wild-type cells killed the mouse very quickly, and all mice died after 6 days of infection. However, M1M2 showed a substantially delayed death rate for which all mice died 12 days after fungal infection. The GliZ deletion mutant showed a death rate similar to that of the M1M2 mutant. To investigate fungal lung infection, a fungal burden assay was performed. As shown in Figure 5D, the negative control, which was not infected by A. fumigatus, showed clear morphology in hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and Grocott methenamine silver (GMS) staining, indicating that no fungal infection was present. However, GMS staining of the positive control, which was infected with wild-type cells, showed many fungal cells. In addition, the M1M2 and GliZ mutants did not show significant fungal cells from H&E and GMS staining and were similar to the negative control. These results indicate that ZafA plays an important role in gliotoxin biosynthesis by regulating GliZ expression and that it is a virulence factor in fungal infection. 2.4. Transcriptome Analysis Showed that the Expression of Gli Cluster Genes was Upregulated during Fungal Infection of Macrophages by Activating ZafA Gene Expression It has been reported that zinc depletion occurs during pathogen infection of macrophages, and this phenomenon is a host defense system against microbial pathogens. To identify the involvement of ZafA in gliotoxin production during fungal infection of macrophages, RNA-seq analysis was performed using phagocytic cells of macrophages with A. fumigatus. After infection of macrophages with A. fumigatus for 1 and 2 h, total RNA was extracted from the infected cells and RNA-seq analysis was performed. Zero infection time was the comparative control. As shown in Figure 6A, transcriptome analysis revealed that the expression of genes involved in metal metabolism and secondary metabolite biosynthesis was regulated and that the genes involved in zinc metabolism were upregulated specifically after infection. Interestingly, we found that gli cluster genes were also upregulated. To confirm the RNA-seq data, qRT-PCR was performed. As shown in Figure 6B, ZafA and three zinc transporters, ZrtA, ZrtB, and ZrtC, were upregulated after infection with A. fumigatus. GliZ and other gli cluster genes were also upregulated after infection. These data coincide with our previous in vitro data and indicate that zinc regulates the pathogenicity of A. fumigatus during phagocytosis by regulating gliotoxin biosynthesis. Finally, we constructed transcriptome network modeling of the genes involved in zinc, copper, iron, and gliotoxin metabolism during the phagocytosis pathway. As shown in Figure 6C, the genes involved in zinc, copper, iron, and gliotoxin metabolism were grouped individually, and up- and downregulated genes are shown. From the transcriptome network, we found that ZafA and GliZ were upregulated during phagocytosis and that copper- and iron-related genes were also upregulated. Here, we focused on the relationship between ZafA and GliZ. As shown in Figure 6C, the genes involved in zinc metabolism, such as ZafA and ZrfC, were upregulated. Furthermore, the genes involved in gliotoxin biosynthesis, such as GliZ and GliT, were upregulated. We hypothesized from our results that zinc starvation during phagocytosis upregulated ZafA first and then GliZ. Finally, gliotoxin biosynthesis was upregulated even when zinc depletion was caused by host cells. These data indicate that zinc regulates gliotoxin biosynthesis directly and that the involvement of other metals in secondary metabolite biosynthesis should be identified further.