RESULTS AziN is closely related to AZB production For a comprehensive analysis of the toxin resistance mechanism in the ICL agent producer S. sahachiroi, all open reading frames within and adjacent to the AZB biosynthetic gene cluster were investigated. In addition to the previously reported orf1/alkZ, orf3/aziN also attracted our attention. Although deletion of the gene aziN from the S. sahachiroi chromosome (ΔaziN, Supplementary Figure S2A) did not completely abolish the production of AZB, the yield of this compound was significantly reduced, and no intermediate with a new structure has been detected thus far. When aziN was cloned into the expression vector pWS052 and introduced into the gene deletion mutant strain ΔaziN, the AZB yield was partially restored in the gene complementation strain aziNCP (Figure 1A and Supplementary Figure S2B). No obvious difference was observed between the wild-type strain and the two mutant strains, ΔaziN and aziNCP, in morphological phenotypic characteristics of growth rate, colony and spore formation, except for the AZB yield. It is apparent that AziN is implicated in AZB biosynthesis and has a remarkable effect on the efficiency of the production of this drug. Figure 1.The drug binding protein AziN has remarkable effect on efficiency of the AZB production. (A) Bioassay (up) and LC–MS analysis (down) of the AZB production in the wild-type (WT) and mutant strains, ΔaziN and aziNCP. (B) Equilibrium fluorescence titration assay to detect the interaction of AziN with two different ICL agents, AZB and MMC. (C) Microscale thermophoresis binding assay to monitor the binding isotherm of two ICL agents, AZB and MMC, with AziN. The drug binding protein AziN has remarkable effect on efficiency of the AZB production. (A) Bioassay (up) and LC–MS analysis (down) of the AZB production in the wild-type (WT) and mutant strains, ΔaziN and aziNCP. (B) Equilibrium fluorescence titration assay to detect the interaction of AziN with two different ICL agents, AZB and MMC. (C) Microscale thermophoresis binding assay to monitor the binding isotherm of two ICL agents, AZB and MMC, with AziN. AziN specifically binds to AZB A BLASTP search indicated that AziN shows homology to some unidentified proteins of the glyoxalase/bleomycin resistance/dioxygenase family. The well-known proteins of this superfamily include type I extradiol dioxygenase, methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase, glyoxalase I and a group of antibiotic resistance proteins (27). The bleomycin-binding protein (BlmT) encoded by the transposon Tn5 and the mitomycin-binding protein (MRD) derived from the MMC biosynthetic gene cluster are typical representatives of these antibiotic resistance determinants, conferring resistance by drug sequestration (10,28,29). Another kind of antibiotic resistance protein in this superfamily, the fosfomycin resistance protein encoded by the transposon Tn 2921, renders fosfomycin inactive to confer fosfomycin resistance (30). Although AziN shares low amino acid sequence identity (23−17%) and similarity (38−32%) with these antibiotic resistance proteins, its capacity to bind and inactivate drugs has been investigated under limited information acquired from bioinformatics analyses. An equilibrium fluorescence titration assay was used to detect the binding affinity between AziN (Supplementary Figure S3) and putative ligands, including different ICL agents. After excitation at 295 nm, the maximum fluorescence emission of the purified protein was observed at 325 nm. The intrinsic fluorescence of AziN steadily decreased as the concentration of AZB increased, whereas the other ICL agent MMC did not alter the protein fluorescence (Figure 1B, Supplementary Figure S4A and E). The dissociation constant (Kd) of AziN and AZB calculated by nonlinear regression analysis (1.37 ± 0.11 μM) fits well in the range of reported Kd values for known drug-binding resistance proteins (50 nM to 31 μM) (31). Thus, it is clear that the quenching of the AziN fluorescence is due to AZB binding. Additionally, a microscale thermophoresis (MST) assay (32) was conducted to measure the interaction of AziN with ligands. Consistent with the results of the equilibrium fluorescence titration assay, the protein bound to AZB rather than MMC (Figure 1C), showing its capability for specific drug recognition and binding. Since the glyoxalase/bleomycin resistance/dioxygenase superfamily of proteins usually contains a metal-binding domain, AziN was titrated with different metal ions such as Cu2+, Fe3+, Ca2+ and Zn2+, and the resulting fluorescence emission spectra suggested the interaction of AziN with Cu2+ (Supplementary Figure S4 and S5). The quenched fluorescence intensity in the titration of AziN with Cu2+ was reversed by the addition of the chelating agent EDTA (Supplementary Figure S4D and S5B), while the titration of AziN with AZB was not affected (Supplementary Figures S4B and S5C), demonstrating the mutual independence of the interactions of AziN with these two ligands. In vivo expression of AziN confers resistance to AZB Given that drug binding proteins can usually provide resistance to host cells from drug toxicity, the in vivo activity of AziN was analysed by heterologous expression of the protein in Streptomyces lividans ZX1, an AZB-sensitive strain. The expression plasmid pWS052-aziN and the empty vector pWS052 were introduced into S. lividans ZX1 to yield the expression strains S. lividans::aziN and S. lividans::pWS052, respectively. In both the disc diffusion test and the cross streak assay (Figure 2A), the strain expressing AziN exhibited remarkably enhanced viability in the presence of AZB, indicating the specific drug resistance function of AziN. Figure 2.Effect of binding with the self-resistance determinant AziN on drug activities. (A) Disc diffusion test and cross streak method assay to confirm the antibiotic resistance function of AziN against AZB. The sensitivity of the heterologous expression strains S. lividans::aziN, S. lividans::pWS052, and the gene deletion mutant strains, ΔaziN and ΔaziU3ΔalkZΔaziN, to AZB, were detected and compared with the corresponding control strains (ΔaziU3ΔalkZ, aziNCP). I, 10 μl of methanol was added. II, 10 μl of 0.5 M AZB was added. (B) Antibacterial activity of AZB (up) and AziN-AZB complex (down) against Bacillus subtilis 168. AZB was pre-incubated with or without AziN in different time intervals at 30°C, and then its cytotoxicity was tested by using B. subtilis 168 as the indicator strain. (C) Ultrafiltration process to test the binding effect of AziN on crosslinking activity of AZB. The drug was incubated with AziN at 30°C for 20 min and the resulting azinomycin B-AziN complexes were then separated from the redundant free drug by multiple ultrafiltration and washing. The filtrates of three time filtration (Filtrates 1–3) and the remnants in ultrafilter were respectively incubated with the same amount of linear DNA and then alkali denatured before gel electrophoresis. CM represents the original linear double strand DNA of pBluescript SK(+). ssDNA: single-stranded DNA. dsDNA: double-stranded DNA. Effect of binding with the self-resistance determinant AziN on drug activities. (A) Disc diffusion test and cross streak method assay to confirm the antibiotic resistance function of AziN against AZB. The sensitivity of the heterologous expression strains S. lividans::aziN, S. lividans::pWS052, and the gene deletion mutant strains, ΔaziN and ΔaziU3ΔalkZΔaziN, to AZB, were detected and compared with the corresponding control strains (ΔaziU3ΔalkZ, aziNCP). I, 10 μl of methanol was added. II, 10 μl of 0.5 M AZB was added. (B) Antibacterial activity of AZB (up) and AziN-AZB complex (down) against Bacillus subtilis 168. AZB was pre-incubated with or without AziN in different time intervals at 30°C, and then its cytotoxicity was tested by using B. subtilis 168 as the indicator strain. (C) Ultrafiltration process to test the binding effect of AziN on crosslinking activity of AZB. The drug was incubated with AziN at 30°C for 20 min and the resulting azinomycin B-AziN complexes were then separated from the redundant free drug by multiple ultrafiltration and washing. The filtrates of three time filtration (Filtrates 1–3) and the remnants in ultrafilter were respectively incubated with the same amount of linear DNA and then alkali denatured before gel electrophoresis. CM represents the original linear double strand DNA of pBluescript SK(+). ssDNA: single-stranded DNA. dsDNA: double-stranded DNA. To further confirm the physiological function of AziN in the wild-type strain S. sahachiroi, the single gene deletion mutant strain ΔaziN was employed in cross streak assay as well. Unexpectedly, the difference in sensitivity to AZB between ΔaziN and the wild type strain was undetectable. Considering the essential role of AlkZ in AZB self-resistance, another aziN gene deletion mutant strain ΔaziU3ΔalkZΔaziN was constructed based on the alkZ gene deletion strain ΔaziU3ΔalkZ (22) (Supplementary Figure S2C) and used for the disc diffusion susceptibility test. The triple gene deletion mutant showed greater sensitivity to AZB than the original double gene deletion strain ΔaziU3ΔalkZ (Figure 2A). After eliminating the interference effect of alkZ on drug resistance, the resistance function of AziN against AZB began to unfold. In vitro binding of AziN to AZB does not affect drug activity Drug binding proteins are generally considered to confer resistance by drug sequestration and inactivation (33,34), therefore, the antibacterial and crosslinking activities of AZB bound with AziN were checked. The inhibitory effect of AZB on the growth of Bacillus subtilis 168 gradually decreased as incubation time increased due to drug degradation at room temperature. However, no difference in antibacterial activity between samples with and without AziN was observed (Figure 2B). Moreover, crosslinking activity of the AziN–AZB complexes was detected after the free drug molecules were removed by ultrafiltration and washing. As shown in Figure 2C, DNA was crosslinked by the protein-drug complexes (the remnant of reaction 3), while in the control sample without protein (reaction 2), the same amount of drugs was transferred to the filtrate, and no crosslinking activity of the remnant in the ultrafilter was found. The results of both experiments demonstrated that the binding of AziN to AZB neither blocked nor inactivated the active groups of the antibiotic molecule, in contrast to most known drug binding proteins. AziN specifically recognizes and incises the AZB–ICL DNA To determine the real resistance mechanism of AziN, the possibility of interaction between the protein and DNA, the target of the drug, was then investigated by an electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) after its influence on drug activities was excluded. Because no conserved domain for DNA binding was found in AziN, a 154 bp DNA fragment from the chromosome of another Streptomyces strain was randomly used for the experiment. After incubation with or without AZB at 37°C for 2 h, AziN was subsequently added to the DNA solution at 30°C for 20 min of incubation. With increasing concentrations of AziN, a retardation band of the protein-DNA complex started to appear gradually in ICL DNA samples, while no change was observed in native DNA (Figure 3A). The drug was supposed to mediate the binding of AziN to AZB–ICL DNA. Surprisingly, however, a significant DNA degradation phenomenon was observed in ICL DNA samples with a further increase in AziN concentration, while native DNA remained unchanged under the same conditions. This result suggested that the interaction between AziN and ICL DNA might lead to DNA degradation. Figure 3.Identification of the nuclease-like activity of AziN. (A) EMSA analysis of the binding of AziN to ICL DNA. A 154 bp DNA fragment was pre-incubated with or without AZB, and subsequently treated with various amounts of AziN (0, 1.5, 3, 4.5 mg/mL). The reaction mixtures were analyzed by 4% native PAGE. (B) Characterization of the cleavage activity of AziN. The crosslinked circular DNA was incubated with different concentration of AziN (0.67, 1.3, 2.7 mg/ml) at 30°C for 20 min and subsequently treated with 1 mg/mL proteinase K at 37°C for 15 min prior to gel electrophoresis. (C) Detection of the incision pattern of AziN. The crosslinked linear DNA was incubated without or with AziN (1.3 mg/ml) and then denatured by alkaline treatment before gel analysis. The inactivated AziN was used as a protein control (lanes 3, 6, 9 and 12) and the native linear DNA was used as a DNA control (lanes 1, 5–7, 11 and 12). (D) The proposed status of ICL DNA before (b) and after (a) the cleavage of AziN under alkaline treatment. Identification of the nuclease-like activity of AziN. (A) EMSA analysis of the binding of AziN to ICL DNA. A 154 bp DNA fragment was pre-incubated with or without AZB, and subsequently treated with various amounts of AziN (0, 1.5, 3, 4.5 mg/mL). The reaction mixtures were analyzed by 4% native PAGE. (B) Characterization of the cleavage activity of AziN. The crosslinked circular DNA was incubated with different concentration of AziN (0.67, 1.3, 2.7 mg/ml) at 30°C for 20 min and subsequently treated with 1 mg/mL proteinase K at 37°C for 15 min prior to gel electrophoresis. (C) Detection of the incision pattern of AziN. The crosslinked linear DNA was incubated without or with AziN (1.3 mg/ml) and then denatured by alkaline treatment before gel analysis. The inactivated AziN was used as a protein control (lanes 3, 6, 9 and 12) and the native linear DNA was used as a DNA control (lanes 1, 5–7, 11 and 12). (D) The proposed status of ICL DNA before (b) and after (a) the cleavage of AziN under alkaline treatment. The DNA repair capacity of AziN was detected by crosslinking assay of the double-stranded circular DNA of the plasmid pOJ260. The DNA distortion induced by AZB–ICL led to conformation changes in supercoiled DNA, which were manifested by decreased migration speed in electrophoresis (Supplementary Figure S6). Once the crosslinking was removed, the DNA configuration resumed, as did the speed of DNA migration (20). After treatment with AziN, a new migration band of decrosslinked DNA appeared between ICL DNA and ocDNA (open circular DNA), and its intensity increased with the protein concentration (Figure 3B, lanes 2 and 3), indicating the ability of AziN to repair ICL DNA. Moreover, the new shift band exhibited different mobility from the product repaired by the DNA glycosylase Orf1/AlkZ (22) (lane 6), implying distinct incision modes between the two proteins. DNA degradation was also found in the sample with a higher concentration of AziN (lane 4), providing further evidence for DNA strand breakage induced by the repair of the protein. To confirm the pattern of cleavage, the linearized plasmid pBluescript SK(–) DNA was then used in the ICL repair assay (Figure 3C). Since the conformation change in linear DNA is not obvious, alkali denaturation was employed to distinguish between crosslinked and uncrosslinked DNA prior to agarose gel analysis. The basic double helix structure of repaired ICL DNA was preserved due to the base-pairing hydrogen bonds before alkali denaturation (lane 4). When the base pairing of repaired ICL DNA was disrupted via alkali denaturation, a large amount of low-molecular weight DNA appeared (lane 10), which verified the incision of AziN at the phosphodiester backbone of ICL DNA (Figure 3D). The substrate specificity of AziN has been investigated by using DNA containing different types of distortions (Supplementary Figure S7). A 29-bp oligodeoxynucleotide duplex with a single AZB–ICL site of 5′-GCC-3′ was used to generate AZB–ICL DNA as the positive control. The other type of ICL structure derived from the reaction between an abasic (Ap) site and an adenine (A) residue on the opposite strands of DNA helix, was prepared (26) and validated by its resistance to digestion by the Ap endonuclease Endo IV (lane 4 in Supplementary Figure S7B and D). While AZB-ICL DNA was distinctly cleaved to produce a small fragment, no incision was observed in the Ap-A ICL DNA samples after treatment with AziN at the same dose. Similarly, the protein did not act on mismatched DNA (MIS) (Supplementary Figure S7C). These results established the specific cleavage activity of AziN on AZB-ICL DNA and excluded distractions of possible contaminant nucleases in the protein preparation. The lack of crystallographic data of highly homologous proteins as modelling templates makes the structure prediction of AziN and the identification of potential active sites an arduous task. Therefore, we used both SWISS-MODEL and PredictProtein servers to analyse the protein sequences, and 17 relatively conserved amino acid residues of AziN were selected for site-directed mutagenesis (Supplementary Table S4) to investigate their roles in incision and binding to AZB-ICL DNA. In vitro cleavage assay showed that most of mutants harboured near wild-type cleavage activities, except that mutations of L17A, W21A and R82D showed ∼20% of wild-type activity. The results of EMSA showed that L17A and R82D were devoid of the ability to bind ICL DNA while W21A retained weak binding to ICL-DNA (Supplementary Figure S8), suggesting that they mediate catalysis through ICL DNA binding. Cleavage sites for AziN For precise identification of the cleavage sites for AziN in ICL DNA, a 21-bp oligodeoxynucleotide duplex containing one 5′-GCC-3′ site located with AT tracts (named GCC2, Supplementary Table S3) was designed according to the previous literature (22,35–37). The forward strand of GCC2 was 3′-end-FAM labeled (in Figure 4D) and then served as the substrate for the DNA cleavage assay. The first alkylation reaction induced by AZB occurred mostly at 3′-CGG-5′ of the reverse strand, but the FAM dye was labeled on the forward strand of GGC2. Hence, mono-alkylation products were invisible in this case, and the product with lower mobility than native DNA in 20% denatured polyacrylamide gel was supposed to be the crosslinked oligodeoxynucleotides (lane 2 in Figure 4A). As increasing concentrations of AziN were added, the intensity of the ICL DNA band decreased, and a new DNA fragment with higher mobility than the denatured native DNA appeared (lanes 4–5 in Figure 4A), which was supposed to be the cleavage product of AziN. To determine the size of this fragment, two pairs of oligodeoxynucleotides (GCC3 and GGC5, Supplementary Table S3) containing a single SaqAI site were designed and 3′-end-FAM labeled on reverse strand. After digestion with SaqAI, the DNA duplexes 4-/6-nt-FAM from GCC3 and 8-/10-nt-FAM from GCC5 (Supplementary Figure S9) were produced and used as the DNA molecular weight standards M1 and M2, respectively. As shown in Figure 4B, the small cleavage fragment of GCC2 was identical in mobility to M2 in denatured PAGE, which indicated that AziN catalysed hydrolytic cleavage of the phosphodiester bond at the 3′ end of the crosslinking site on the forward strand to produce a 10-mer DNA fragment containing the FAM label at its 3′ end (Figure 4D). Figure 4.Incision of AziN on AZB-ICL oligodeoxynucleotides. (A) Cleavage of AziN on ICL GCC2. The ICL DNA was incubated with AziN for 20 min and then analyzed in 20% denatured polyacrylamide gel. (B) Analysis of the size of AziN incision product from ICL GCC2 with the use of two DNA molecular weight standards, M1 and M2. (C) Denatured PAGE analysis of AziN incision on ICL GCC3. (D) Proposed incision mode of AziN on ICL GCC2. (E) The predicted cleavage products of ICL GCC3 in 20% denatured polyacrylamide gel. Incision of AziN on AZB-ICL oligodeoxynucleotides. (A) Cleavage of AziN on ICL GCC2. The ICL DNA was incubated with AziN for 20 min and then analyzed in 20% denatured polyacrylamide gel. (B) Analysis of the size of AziN incision product from ICL GCC2 with the use of two DNA molecular weight standards, M1 and M2. (C) Denatured PAGE analysis of AziN incision on ICL GCC3. (D) Proposed incision mode of AziN on ICL GCC2. (E) The predicted cleavage products of ICL GCC3 in 20% denatured polyacrylamide gel. When FAM dye was labelled at the 3′ end of the reverse strand of GCC3, both mono-adducts and ICL DNA were visibly displayed in lane 2 of Figure 4C. After AziN was added to the mixture, the migration band of ICL DNA disappeared, and a unique shift band with mobility between the mono-adducts and ICL DNA was generated (lanes 4 and 5). No DNA fragment smaller than native DNA, suggesting that there was no incision in the 3′ flanking region of the crosslinking site on the reverse strand. Thus, the new band presented in lanes 4 and 5 of Figure 4C was regarded as the residual cleavage product after removal of the 3′ incised sequence in the forward strand (Figure 4E). In addition, the intensity of the mono-adduct band was almost untouched by AziN, implying that the protein incised ICL DNA rather than the mono-alkylation product. To verify the above results and obtain a more comprehensive analysis of the AziN cleavage mode, a longer 29-bp oligodeoxynucleotide duplex (GCC6, Supplementary Table S3) was 3′-end-FAM labeled on the forward strand (GCC6-1), reverse strand (GCC6-2), and both strands (GCC6-3). When FAM dye was labeled at the 3′ end of the forward strand (GCC6-1), a smaller band (fragment I) than native DNA was observed in both denatured and native PAGE (Figure 5C and D), while a larger band (fragment II) than mono-adduct DNA was traced in the cleavage products of the ICL DNA with a 3′-end-FAM label on the reverse strand (GCC6-2). Two cleavage products (fragments I and II) were detected simultaneously when both strands of GCC6-3 were 3′-end-FAM labelled (Figure 5F and G). The mobility of fragment I was identical to that of the DNA marker M4 (18-nt-FAM/16-nt) in denatured PAGE (Figure 5C and F), while it was slightly higher than that of M4 in native PAGE (Figure 5D and G). It is evident that AziN could cut both strands of ICL DNA, and the cleavage site on the reverse strand should be in the 5′ flanking region of the crosslinking site. For precise localization of the cleavage sites, both ends of one DNA strand (GCC6-4 labelled on the forward strand and GCC6-5 labeled on the reverse strand) were labelled with 5′-end-TAMRA and 3′-end-FAM simultaneously. In addition to the large band of fragment II, a small band of 18-nt-FAM, regarded as the forward sequence of fragment I (lane 4 in Figure 5H), and a small band of 11-nt-TAMRA, regarded as the reverse sequence of fragment I (lane 4 in Figure 5I), were detected in the cleavage assay of crosslinked GCC6-4 and GCC6-5, respectively. The cleavage site on the reverse strand is supposed to be between the fifth and sixth nucleotides near the 5′ end of the cross-linking site. Thus, fragment II is most likely the other half of the cleavage products, which still contain crosslinking structures after a double stranded break (Figure 5B). Due to its high affinity with the drug, AziN can specifically recognize and bind the AZB-ICL DNA. Moreover, it can further lead to hydrolytic cleavage of the phosphodiester bonds adjacent to the crosslinked structure on both strands. Figure 5.Characterization of the incision sites for AziN. (A) The predicted cleavage products of AziN from ICL GCC6 containing different end labels. The small arrows represent the incision sites of AziN. (B) The proposed incision mode of AziN on ICL GCC6-3. The cleavage products of AziN from ICL GCC6-1 in denatured (C) and native PAGE (D), from ICL GCC6-2 in denatured PAGE (E), and from ICL GCC6-3 in denatured (F) and native PAGE (G), were analysed with the use of M4 as the marker. The ICL GCC6 with 3′-end-FAM and 5′-end-TAMRA labeled at forward (H) or reverse (I) strand was treated with AziN for 20 min and subsequently analysed in denatured PAGE with M4 and M5 as markers. (J) The proposed repair mechanisms of AziN for ICL DNA. TLS: translesion synthesis. HR: homologous recombination. NER: nucleotide excision repair. Characterization of the incision sites for AziN. (A) The predicted cleavage products of AziN from ICL GCC6 containing different end labels. The small arrows represent the incision sites of AziN. (B) The proposed incision mode of AziN on ICL GCC6-3. The cleavage products of AziN from ICL GCC6-1 in denatured (C) and native PAGE (D), from ICL GCC6-2 in denatured PAGE (E), and from ICL GCC6-3 in denatured (F) and native PAGE (G), were analysed with the use of M4 as the marker. The ICL GCC6 with 3′-end-FAM and 5′-end-TAMRA labeled at forward (H) or reverse (I) strand was treated with AziN for 20 min and subsequently analysed in denatured PAGE with M4 and M5 as markers. (J) The proposed repair mechanisms of AziN for ICL DNA. TLS: translesion synthesis. HR: homologous recombination. NER: nucleotide excision repair.