RESULTS Monasones are bona fide SMs of M. ruber M7. Our previous studies have indicated that MonAzPs are largely (but not entirely) absent and that trihydroxynaphthalene 2 and monasones 3 and 4 (Fig. 1) are the major products of an M. ruber M7 mutant in which mrpigC, a gene within the MABGC, was deleted (16–18). This gene encodes the ketoreductase MrPigC that affords benzaldehyde 5 during MonAzP biosynthesis by reducing the C-11 ketone of the unstable intermediate 1, the putative product of MrPigA, a nonreducing polyketide synthase (nrPKS) (Fig. 1). We proposed that in the absence of MrPigC, intermediate 1 undergoes spontaneous aldol condensation to yield trihydroxynaphthalene 2, and this derailment product (compound 2) is subject to spontaneous oxidization to monasone A (compound 3), which in turn may be fortuitously reduced to monasone B (compound 4) by Monascus enzymes. Therefore, we and others interpreted these results by regarding monasones as incidental shunt products that may only be obtained in substantial amounts by blocking MonAzP biosynthesis (15–17). FIG 1A branching pathway yields MonAzPs and monasone congeners in M. ruber M7. The reactive polyketide intermediate 1 gives rise to MonAzPs on one branch (represented by rubropunctatin 7a and monascorubrin 7b) and to naphthoquinone congeners on the other branch (represented by trihydroxynaphthalene 2, monasone A [compound 3], monasone B [compound 4], tetralindione 8, and trihydroxytetralone MA-1 [compound 9]). The structures of the boxed compounds were elucidated by LC-MS/MS and NMR analysis (data for compounds 2, 3, 4, 8 and 9 are in Table S8 and Fig. S10 [19]). A branching pathway yields MonAzPs and monasone congeners in M. ruber M7. The reactive polyketide intermediate 1 gives rise to MonAzPs on one branch (represented by rubropunctatin 7a and monascorubrin 7b) and to naphthoquinone congeners on the other branch (represented by trihydroxynaphthalene 2, monasone A [compound 3], monasone B [compound 4], tetralindione 8, and trihydroxytetralone MA-1 [compound 9]). The structures of the boxed compounds were elucidated by LC-MS/MS and NMR analysis (data for compounds 2, 3, 4, 8 and 9 are in Table S8 and Fig. S10 [19]). To our surprise, we have found that cocultivation of the wild-type M. ruber M7 with various bacteria or fungi elicits the biosynthesis of compounds 2, 3, and 4 (see Table S3 in reference 19), while the production of MonAzPs remains undisturbed under these culture conditions (Table S4 [19]). All MonAzPs and the monasone congeners 2, 3, and 4 should be derived from M. ruber M7, since these compounds were not detected upon monoculture of the challenger microorganisms (Fig. S1, Penicillium expansum ATCC 7861 as an example [19]). Furthermore, we found that monasones 3 and 4 exhibit broad-spectrum antibiotic activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and antifungal activity against filamentous fungi, including the monasone-producing M. ruber strain itself (Table S5 [19]). Thus, we consider that under some ecologically relevant conditions (such as growth in mixed cultures), these supposed shunt products appear as authentic SMs that may function as allelochemicals against potential competitors of the producing fungi in their natural ecosystem (20). A nested subset of coevolving genes within the MABGC correlates with monasone production. We have confirmed that production of monasones by M. ruber M7 requires MrPigA, the nrPKS that assembles intermediate 1, since monasones 2, 3, and 4 were not produced by the ΔmrpigA knockout strain in monoculture or under monasone-eliciting cocultivation conditions (Table S3 [19]). Furthermore, bacteria and fungi did not stimulate M. ruber M7 to produce monasones when the gene mrpigB encoding MrPigB (also known as PigR) (21), the MonAzP cluster-specific positive regulator, was deleted (Table S3 [19]). To further confirm mrpigB function, we reevaluated the effects of the deletion of mrpigB on the transcription of each gene in the 16-gene MABGC by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis, both under MonAzP-competent monoculture and monasone-eliciting cocultivation conditions (Fig. 2a). During MonAzP-producing monoculture, all MABGC genes were expressed in the wild-type strain, apart from mrpigI that encodes a transcription factor whose role in MonAzP biosynthesis is unknown. Unexpectedly, as shown by the ΔmrpigB strain, MrPigB controls the expression of only six genes in the MABGC: mrpigA, the nrPKS; mrpigH, an enoyl reductase; mrpigM and mrpigO, an acetyltransferase-deacetylase pair; mrpigN, a flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)-dependent monooxygenase; and mrpigP, a major facilitator superfamily (MFS) transporter (Fig. 2b) (15). Furthermore, cocultivation did not restore the expression of these six genes in the ΔmrpigB strain, indicating that transcriptional activation of these genes upon elicitation is achieved primarily through MrPigB. This tight control by a transcriptional regulator purportedly governing MonAzP production was unexpected for some of these genes, since among the six genes in the MrPigB regulon, MrPigP had been shown to be unnecessary for MonAzP production, while MrPigH plays only a supplementary role in the biosynthesis of these pigments (15–17). FIG 2A conserved MrPigB regulon in MABGC-like gene clusters. (a) qRT-PCR analysis of the MABGC genes of the M. ruber M7 wild-type (WT), ΔmrpigB, and ΔmrpigC knockout strains, measured from monoculture or during cocultivation with Penicillium expansum ATCC 7861. Gene expression levels from monoculture are taken as the basis of comparison, with the means and standard deviations calculated from measurements from three biological replicates for each strain/cultivation condition shown. (b) MABGC-like gene clusters in filamentous fungal genomes. Arrows with identical colors indicate orthologous genes; white arrows show nonorthologous genes. (c) Proteins encoded by MABGC-related SM gene clusters of various fungi. Proteins highlighted in red are encoded by all MABGC-like gene clusters. Genes encoding orthologues of the MFS transporter MrPigP (highlighted in pink) are present in the majority of the MABGC-like gene clusters. A conserved MrPigB regulon in MABGC-like gene clusters. (a) qRT-PCR analysis of the MABGC genes of the M. ruber M7 wild-type (WT), ΔmrpigB, and ΔmrpigC knockout strains, measured from monoculture or during cocultivation with Penicillium expansum ATCC 7861. Gene expression levels from monoculture are taken as the basis of comparison, with the means and standard deviations calculated from measurements from three biological replicates for each strain/cultivation condition shown. (b) MABGC-like gene clusters in filamentous fungal genomes. Arrows with identical colors indicate orthologous genes; white arrows show nonorthologous genes. (c) Proteins encoded by MABGC-related SM gene clusters of various fungi. Proteins highlighted in red are encoded by all MABGC-like gene clusters. Genes encoding orthologues of the MFS transporter MrPigP (highlighted in pink) are present in the majority of the MABGC-like gene clusters. To obtain an evolutionary perspective on the MrPigB regulon, we analyzed filamentous fungal genomes available in the NCBI GenBank and in the “1000 Fungal Genomes Project” database of the US Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute (http://1000.fungalgenomes.org, accessed 3 October 2019) for the presence of MABGC-related SM biosynthetic gene clusters. Apparent SM clusters with a gene encoding an nrPKS orthologous (>45% identity over the full length of the enzyme) to MrPigA from the MABGC of M. ruber M7 were found to exist in the genomes of 17 different fungal species from the genera Monascus, Talaromyces, Aspergillus, Penicillium, and Coccidioides (Fig. 2b and c). Curiously, genes for orthologues of MrPigB and those for three proteins encoded in the MrPigB regulon (MrPigA, MrPigH, and MrPigN) were seen to be cooccurring and highly conserved in all these gene clusters (Fig. 2b and c). Orthologues of the multidrug transporter MrPigP are found in 11 of the 17 gene clusters (Fig. 2b), while orthologues of the rest of the MonAzP genes, including those encoding MrPigM and MrPigO from the MrPigB regulon of M. ruber M7, are only present in the minority of these putative SM biosynthetic gene clusters. Monasone biosynthesis is encoded by genes in the MrPigB regulon of M. ruber M7. MrPigA was characterized in our previous work by gene knockout as the nrPKS responsible for the production of the polyketide scaffold of MonAzPs (15). MrPigA was also shown to yield large amounts of trihydroxynaphthalene 2 and smaller amounts of monasones 3 and 4 upon heterologous expression in yeast (15). In the present study, MrPigA was heterologously expressed in Aspergillus oryzae M-2-3 to yield compounds 2 and 3 (2.2 and 7.1 mg/liter) (Fig. 1 and 3a). We also observed that purified trihydroxynaphthalene 2 readily autooxidized into monasone A (compound 3) in aqueous solutions under aerobic conditions (Fig. S2a [19]). Remarkably, coexpression of mrpigA and mrpigN in A. oryzae led to the production of significantly larger amounts of compounds 2 and 3 (7.2 and 18.4 mg/liter) (Fig. 3a). Increased production of monasones was unexpected, as MrPigN had earlier been identified as the enzyme that is responsible for the hydroxylation of C-4 of benzaldehyde 5 during MonAzP biosynthesis (Fig. 1). However, MrPigN had not been implicated in naphthoquinone production until now, and monasones 3 and 4 do not feature a C-4 tertiary alcohol. FIG 3Biosynthesis of monasones during in vivo and vitro enzymatic reactions with MrPigA and MrPigN. (a) Metabolite profiles (reversed-phase HPLC traces recorded at 280 nm with a photodiode array detector) of fermentation extracts of A. oryzae M-2-3 expressing the indicated MABGC genes. (b) In vitro enzymatic assays with the indicated purified MABGC enzymes (reversed-phase HPLC traces recorded at 280 nm with a photodiode array detector). (c) Quantification of trihydroxynaphthalene 2 in enzymatic reactions with the indicated enzymes after 10 min or 30 min. Yields of compound 2 are shown in micrograms per milliliter as the means ± standard deviations (SDs) from three independent experiments of three replicates each, n = 9. Statistical analysis with Student's t test revealed that there was a significant difference between group MrPigA and group MrPigA+MrPigN at P < 0.05. Biosynthesis of monasones during in vivo and vitro enzymatic reactions with MrPigA and MrPigN. (a) Metabolite profiles (reversed-phase HPLC traces recorded at 280 nm with a photodiode array detector) of fermentation extracts of A. oryzae M-2-3 expressing the indicated MABGC genes. (b) In vitro enzymatic assays with the indicated purified MABGC enzymes (reversed-phase HPLC traces recorded at 280 nm with a photodiode array detector). (c) Quantification of trihydroxynaphthalene 2 in enzymatic reactions with the indicated enzymes after 10 min or 30 min. Yields of compound 2 are shown in micrograms per milliliter as the means ± standard deviations (SDs) from three independent experiments of three replicates each, n = 9. Statistical analysis with Student's t test revealed that there was a significant difference between group MrPigA and group MrPigA+MrPigN at P < 0.05. To further demonstrate the involvement of MrPigN in monasone biosynthesis, we expressed mrpigA and mrpigN under the strong promoter PamyB in A. oryzae M-2-3 and purified the corresponding recombinant proteins by sequential ultrafiltration, ammonium sulfate precipitation, and Ni-Sepharose column chromatography to yield 23 mg MrPigA and 42 mg MrPigN from 100 g wet mycelia (Fig. S3 [19]). Production of compound 2 was recapitulated in a reconstituted in vitro enzymatic assay with MrPigA from acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA), malonyl-CoA, NADPH, and S-adenosyl methionine as the substrates. Small amounts of the autooxidation product monasone A (compound 3) were also detected in the reaction. Meanwhile, recombinant MrPigN was shown to efficiently convert benzaldehyde 5 into azanigerone E (compound 6), as expected (Fig. S2b [19]). Importantly, coupled reactions with MrPigA and MrPigN afforded approximately 100% more product 2 than the reaction with MrPigA alone (Fig. 3b and c). Extended in vitro reactions with MrPigA and MrPigN also yielded minor amounts of tetralindione 8, the C-4 hydroxylated analogue of trihydroxynaphthalene 2 (Fig. 3b). MA-1 (compound 9) that derives from compound 8 by reduction was also detected in fermentations with A. oryzae strains coexpressing mrpigA and mrpigN (Fig. 3a), just as with recombinant yeast expressing these two genes, or with the ΔmrpigC knockout mutant of M. ruber M7 (15, 17). Taken together, these observations indicate that MrPigN not only is involved in MonAzP biosynthesis but also facilitates the formation of trihydroxynaphthalene 2, the precursor of monasones. To account for this result, we propose that during MonAzP biosynthesis, benzaldehyde 5 is readily hydroxylated by MrPigN to yield azanigerone E (compound 6) (Fig. 1). However, in the absence of MrPigC, MrPigN may also intercept intermediate 1, and the binding may assist the folding of this reactive intermediate into a pose conducive to the aldol condensation in the C1-C10 register, thereby increasing the yield of trihydroxynaphthalene 2 and its naphthoquinone derivatives. Importantly, compounds 2, 3, and 4 were not accepted as the substrates for C-4 hydroxylation by MrPigN (Fig. S2c [19]), while intermediate 1 may not be a preferred substrate for hydroxylation, as shown by the very small amounts of compound 8 produced in the MrPigA+MrPigN coupled enzymatic assay and the low yield of MA-1 (compound 9) during the coexpression of the corresponding genes in heterologous hosts. The genes mrpigM and mrpigO encode an acetyltransferase-deacetylase pair necessary for MonAzP biosynthesis. Although these genes are part of the MrPigB regulon in M. ruber M7, they are not conserved in MABGC-like biosynthetic gene clusters (Fig. 2). Deletion of these genes did not influence monasone congener production in ΔmrpigM and ΔmrpigO strains upon monoculture or during cocultivation with P. expansum ATCC 7861 (Table S3 [19]), indicating that the corresponding enzymes do not participate in monasone biosynthesis. Reductive transformations of monasones by MrPigH may contribute to self-resistance. The MABGC gene mrpigH is part of the MrPigB regulon in strain M7, and orthologues of MrPigH are encoded by all of the MABGC-related SM biosynthetic gene clusters detected in databases (Fig. 2). MrPigH was proposed to contribute to, but is not strictly necessary for, the reduction of the C5(2′) double bond in MonAzP intermediates en route to the classical yellow MonAzPs monascin and ankaflavin (15, 16). MrPigH is a short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase similar to enol reductases acting on various aromatic hydrocarbon substrates (22). Since monasones 3 and 4 feature enol groups, we wondered whether MrPigH may also be involved in the biosynthesis of naphthoquinone derivatives. Thus, we turned to in vitro reconstitution of the MrPigH-catalyzed reaction. The gene encoding MrPigH was expressed in A. oryzae M-2-3 under the inducible promoter PamyB, and 73 mg of MrPigH was purified from 100 g wet mycelia (Fig. S3 [19]). Considering that reductases such as MrPigH may yield different products under aerobic versus anaerobic conditions (23), we conducted in vitro assays under both conditions with recombinant MrPigH. When monasone A (compound 3) was used as the substrate in the presence of NADPH, distinct product pairs were detected under aerobic versus anaerobic conditions (compounds 10 and 11 versus 14 and 17, respectively) (Fig. 4). The structures of all four products were elucidated by high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) (Table S8 and Fig. S10 [19]). We conclude that MrPigH catalyzes a stepwise reduction sequence. Under aerobic conditions, reduction of the C4(5) enol yields the 4,5-dihydronaphthoquinone 10 with a secondary alcohol at C-5, followed by a further reduction to afford the 5,6-diol 11 (Fig. 4a and b). Under anaerobic conditions, monasone A (compound 3) was converted by MrPigH into the tetrahydroxynaphthalene 14 by reductive aromatization, and further reduced and dearomatized to form the tetrahydroxytetralin 17 (Fig. 4a and c). Formation of tetrahydroxynaphthalene 14 was observed only under anaerobic conditions. Furthermore, while purified compound 14 was stable in the absence of oxygen in aqueous solutions, it was spontaneously oxidized to monasone A in the presence of oxygen (Fig. S4 [19]). FIG 4MrPigH-mediated reductive transformation of monasones. (a) Proposed metabolic grid for the enzymatic reduction of monasone A (compound 3) by MrPigH and MrPigC or a similar ketoreductase under aerobic or anaerobic conditions. The structures of the boxed compounds were elucidated by LC-HRMS/MS and NMR analysis (Table S8 and Fig. S10 [19]). (b) Time course analysis of the reduction of monasone A (compound 3) into compounds 10 and 11 by recombinant MrPigH under aerobic conditions. (c) Time course analysis of the reduction of monasone A (compound 3) into compounds 14 and 17 by MrPigH under anaerobic conditions. (d) Reduction of monasone B (compound 4) by recombinant MrPigH into compound 12 under aerobic conditions and to compound 16 under anaerobic conditions. Reconstituted enzymatic reactions were performed in HEPES buffer (pH 7.0) containing 1.5 mM substrate and 1.5 mM NADPH at 30°C, and metabolites were detected by reversed-phase HPLC at 280 nm with a photodiode array detector. MrPigH-mediated reductive transformation of monasones. (a) Proposed metabolic grid for the enzymatic reduction of monasone A (compound 3) by MrPigH and MrPigC or a similar ketoreductase under aerobic or anaerobic conditions. The structures of the boxed compounds were elucidated by LC-HRMS/MS and NMR analysis (Table S8 and Fig. S10 [19]). (b) Time course analysis of the reduction of monasone A (compound 3) into compounds 10 and 11 by recombinant MrPigH under aerobic conditions. (c) Time course analysis of the reduction of monasone A (compound 3) into compounds 14 and 17 by MrPigH under anaerobic conditions. (d) Reduction of monasone B (compound 4) by recombinant MrPigH into compound 12 under aerobic conditions and to compound 16 under anaerobic conditions. Reconstituted enzymatic reactions were performed in HEPES buffer (pH 7.0) containing 1.5 mM substrate and 1.5 mM NADPH at 30°C, and metabolites were detected by reversed-phase HPLC at 280 nm with a photodiode array detector. We previously observed the cooccurrence of monasone B (compound 4) with its congener monasone A (compound 3) in M. ruber M7 and in recombinant yeast and A. oryzae strains expressing mrpigA (15, 16). To account for the reduction of the carbonyl at C-11 of monasone A (compound 3), we decided to investigate MrPigC that reduces the analogous carbonyl in the putative nrPKS product 1. We purified the recombinant enzyme from A. oryzae expressing the mrpigC gene (Fig. S3 [19]) and used the clarified mycelial lysate of the ΔmrpigC knockout strain of M. ruber M7 as a control. To our surprise, both purified MrPigC and the MrPigC-free M. ruber M7 protein extract catalyzed the facile conversion of monasone A (compound 3) to monasone B (compound 4) (Fig. 4a; Fig. S5a [19]). Similarly, both purified MrPigC and the ΔmrpigC lysate efficiently reduced the C-11 carbonyl of trihydroxytetralone 11 to afford compound 12 (Fig. 4a; Fig. S5b [19]), that of tetrahydroxynaphthalene 14 to produce compound 15 (Fig. 4a; Fig. S5c, anaerobic conditions [19]), and that of tetrahydroxytetralin 17 to yield compound 16 (Fig. 4a; Fig. S5d [19]). Compounds 4, 12, 15, and 16 were isolated and characterized (Table S8 and Fig. S10 [19]). These experiments indicate that MrPigC shows considerable substrate promiscuity paired with strict regiospecificity in reducing the C-11 carbonyl of benzaldehyde (compound 1), naphthoquinone (compound 3), tetrahydroxynaphthalene (compound 14), tetrahydroxytetralin (compound 17), and trihydroxytetralone (compound 11) scaffolds (Fig. 4a). Apparently, M. ruber M7 also expresses another enzyme(s) that is able to carry out this same C-11 reduction, as was seen earlier with the ΔmrpigC strain that still produced small amounts of MonAzP congeners (15). Fittingly, the M. ruber M7 genome encodes two orthologues of MrPigC (GME804_g and GME2122_g, with 46% and 33% identities to MrPigC, respectively), although the role(s) of these proteins in these reductions would need to be confirmed by further experiments. We also demonstrated that the recombinant MrPigH enzyme can catalyze enol reduction with monasone B (compound 4) as the substrate, affording trihydroxytetralone 12 under aerobic conditions through the putative intermediate 13 (Fig. 4a and d). MrPigH is also able to convert monasone B (compound 4) to tetrahydroxytetralin 16 through intermediate 15 under anaerobic conditions (Fig. 4a and d). All these reactions catalyzed by MrPigH and MrPigC form a complex metabolic grid that transforms monasone A (compound 3) to trihydroxytetralone 12 through a six-electron reduction sequence under aerobic conditions or to tetrahydroxytetralin 16 through an eight-electron reduction sequence under anaerobic conditions (Fig. 4a). We have also tried to validate the contributions of MrPigH to monasone transformations in vivo. Despite our best efforts, we were unsuccessful in knocking out or silencing the mrpigH gene in M. ruber M7. Similarly, replacing the promoter of mrpigH with an inducible one such as Padh1 or Pcbh1 was also unsuccessful. However, MrPigH-generated compounds 10, 11, 12, and 16 were detected by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) in fermentations of wild-type M. ruber M7 under monasone-eliciting cocultivation conditions but not in monoculture (Table S6 [19]). Strikingly, the ΔmrpigC knockout mutant produced all naphthoquinone congeners (compounds 2 to 4, 10 to 12, and 14 to 17) under cocultivation conditions, presumably due to the additional C-11 ketoreductase activity of the fungus (Table S6 [19]). Next, we coexpressed mrpigH with mrpigA and mrpigN in A. oryzae M-2-3. Compared to that in the A. oryzae strain expressing mrpigA and mrpigN, production of trihydroxynaphthalene 2 and monasone A (compound 3) was drastically reduced (Fig. S6a [19]). However, compounds 4, 10 to 12, and 14 to 17 were not detected in the A. oryzae production system (Fig. S6 [19]). Feeding any one of the compounds 2 to 4, 10 to 12, or 14 to 17 (each at 0.5 mg/liter) to A. oryzae M-2-3 showed that compounds 2 and 3 are stable, but compounds 4, 10 to 12, and 14 to 17 disappear during incubation with mycelia of this host (Fig. S6 and Table S7 [19]). Thus, naphthoquinone congeners produced by MrPigH from compounds 2 and 3 are readily catabolized by endogenous enzymes of the Aspergillus host. Monasone A (compound 3) and B (compound 4) were confirmed to show antifungal and broad-spectrum antibacterial activities, as expected (Table S5 [1, 2, 19]). However, compounds 12 and 16, the reduced derivatives of monasones A and B, displayed no antifungal or antibiotic activities against the same panel of microorganisms (Table S5 [19]). Intriguingly, while monasones A and B displayed self-toxicity to the producer fungus M. ruber M7, compounds 12 and 16 were found not to be growth inhibitory. Considering that the production of MrPigH is coregulated with the enzymes that produce monasones 3 and 4, these results suggest that the reductive transformations initiated by MrPigH may contribute to the self-resistance of M. ruber M7 against these compounds. MrPigP is a monasone exporter that also contributes to self-resistance in M. ruber M7. The MrPigB regulon of M. ruber M7 includes the gene mrpigP that encodes a major facilitator superfamily (MFS) multidrug transporter. MrPigP is not necessary for MonAzP production, as ΔmrpigP knockout strains continue to produce these azaphilone pigments undisturbed (18, 24). Although MrPigP orthologues are not universally conserved in MABGC-like clusters in fungi, we were intrigued by the possibility that MrPigP may be involved in the efflux of naphthoquinone congeners, at least in M. ruber M7. To test this hypothesis, we constructed the mrpigP gene knockout mutant (ΔmrpigP) and the mrpigP-complemented knockout strain (CΔmrpigP) (Fig. S7 [19]). Then, we compared the antifungal activities of monasones A and B and their reduced derivatives 12 and 16 against those of the wild-type M. ruber M7 and the ΔmrpigP and CΔmrpigP strains. The ΔmrpigP strain turned out to be markedly more sensitive to monasone A (compound 3) and monasone B (compound 4) than the wild type or the complemented strains (Fig. 5a and b and Table S5 [19]) while just as resistant to compounds 12 and 16 as the wild type or the complemented strain. FIG 5MrPigP is an inducible naphthoquinone transporter. (a) Growth of wild-type (WT) M. ruber M7, the ΔmrpigP knockout mutant, and the mrpigC-complemented knockout strain (CΔmrpigP) on PDA plates containing 32 μg/ml or 64 μg/ml monasone A (compound 3) at 30°C for 5 days. (b) MICs of the WT, ΔmrpigP, and CΔmrpigP strains evaluated after cultivation in PDB at 30°C for 5 days. (c) Flux assay measuring the intracellular concentration of monasone A (compound 3) in the WT, ΔmrpigP, and CΔmrpigP strains after immersion in 32 μg/ml monasone A for 6 h. Statistical analysis using Student's t test revealed that there was a significant difference (P < 0.05) between group ΔmrpigP and either group WT or group CΔmrpigP. Groups WT and CΔmrpigP were not significantly different. (d) Relative transcription levels of the mrpigP gene after growth of the wild-type strain on different monasone A (compound 3) concentrations. The β-actin gene was used as an internal standard to normalize expression levels. Extracellular (e) and intracellular (f) MonAzP concentrations in the WT and ΔmrpigP strains. The strains were cultivated in PDB medium at 30°C for 10 days (mid-production phase). MonAzPs measured: Monc, monascin; Ank, ankaflavin; Rubt, rubropunctatin; Monb, monascorubrin; Rubm, rubropunctamine; Monm, monascorubramine. Statistical analysis using Student's t test revealed no significant differences between groups WT and ΔmrpigP for any of these compounds. Data from all quantitative experiments are shown as the means ± SDs from three independent experiments of three replicates each, n = 9. MrPigP is an inducible naphthoquinone transporter. (a) Growth of wild-type (WT) M. ruber M7, the ΔmrpigP knockout mutant, and the mrpigC-complemented knockout strain (CΔmrpigP) on PDA plates containing 32 μg/ml or 64 μg/ml monasone A (compound 3) at 30°C for 5 days. (b) MICs of the WT, ΔmrpigP, and CΔmrpigP strains evaluated after cultivation in PDB at 30°C for 5 days. (c) Flux assay measuring the intracellular concentration of monasone A (compound 3) in the WT, ΔmrpigP, and CΔmrpigP strains after immersion in 32 μg/ml monasone A for 6 h. Statistical analysis using Student's t test revealed that there was a significant difference (P < 0.05) between group ΔmrpigP and either group WT or group CΔmrpigP. Groups WT and CΔmrpigP were not significantly different. (d) Relative transcription levels of the mrpigP gene after growth of the wild-type strain on different monasone A (compound 3) concentrations. The β-actin gene was used as an internal standard to normalize expression levels. Extracellular (e) and intracellular (f) MonAzP concentrations in the WT and ΔmrpigP strains. The strains were cultivated in PDB medium at 30°C for 10 days (mid-production phase). MonAzPs measured: Monc, monascin; Ank, ankaflavin; Rubt, rubropunctatin; Monb, monascorubrin; Rubm, rubropunctamine; Monm, monascorubramine. Statistical analysis using Student's t test revealed no significant differences between groups WT and ΔmrpigP for any of these compounds. Data from all quantitative experiments are shown as the means ± SDs from three independent experiments of three replicates each, n = 9. Next, we performed flux assays with the same compound-strain combinations. Mycelia of wild-type M. ruber M7, ΔmrpigP, and CΔmrpigP strains were grown in potato dextrose broth (PDB) for 7 days and then transferred to phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing monasone A (compound 3), monasone B (compound 4), compound 12, or compound 16. After 6 h, the intracellular concentration of monasone A or B in the ΔmrpigP strain was found to be considerably higher than in the wild type or the CΔmrpigP strain (Fig. 5c; Fig. S8 [19]). However, the intracellular concentrations of compounds 12 and 16 displayed no obvious differences among the wild-type, ΔmrpigP, and CΔmrpigP strains under the same conditions. We also used qRT-PCR to quantify the expression of the mrpigP gene when M. ruber M7 was grown for 5 days in the presence of different concentrations of monasone A (compound 3), monasone B (compound 4), compound 12, or compound 16. The results indicated a notable increase in mrpigP expression with increasing concentrations of monasone A or monasone B (Fig. 5d; Fig. S9 [19]). Incubation with compound 12 or 16 led to only a weak induction of mrpigP expression (Fig. S9 [19]). Finally, to exclude a determining role of MrPigP in MonAzP export, we compared the intracellular and the extracellular concentrations of representative MonAzPs in the wild-type M. ruber M7 and the ΔmrpigP strains at mid-production phase (fermentations usually complete in 12 to 15 days). No obvious difference was detected between the two strains (Fig. 5e and f). Taken together, these experiments confirm that MrPigP is not involved in MonAzP biosynthesis or export, as suggested earlier (15–17). Instead, it is a naphthoquinone-inducible and naphthoquinone-specific transporter that contributes to the self-resistance of M. ruber M7 to monasone A (compound 3) and B (compound 4).