2. Results 2.1. Effects of Spm Pretreatment on Water Status, Membrane Stability, and Photosynthesis To examine whether exogenous application of Spm affected photosynthesis and water status under drought stress, relative water content (RWC), electrolyte leakage (EL), and photosynthetic parameters were detected. Phenotypic changes showed that drought stress inhibited plant growth and accelerated leaf wilting (Figure 1A). After 12 days of drought stress, RWC decreased by 44% or 51% in stressed plants with or without the Spm application, respectively (Figure 1B). Exogenous Spm significantly alleviated the decrease in leaf RWC under drought stress (Figure 1B). Under drought stress, the EL increased significantly, but the EL of plants pretreated with Spm decreased by 17% at 12 d and 22% at 18 d when compared with plants without the Spm pretreatment, respectively (Figure 1C). Under drought stress, total Chl, Chl a, Chl b, photochemical efficiency (Fv/Fm), performance index on absorption basis (PIABS), net photosynthetic rate (Pn), transpiration rate(Tr), stomatal conductance(Gs), and intercellular carbon dioxide concentration(Ci) decreased significantly (Figure 2A–G), while water use efficiency (WUE) significantly increased at 18 d of drought stress (Figure 2H). Results showed that total Chl, Chl a, Chl b, Fv/Fm, and PIABS in the drought-stressed plants decreased significantly by 54%, 65%, 30%, 38%, or 71% when compared to that in the control after 18 days of drought stress, respectively. In contrast to control, the photosynthetic parameters Pn, Tr, Gs, and Ci in the drought-stressed plants also demonstrated a significant decline of 82%, 87%, 90%, or 46%, respectively, but WUE increased significantly by 32% after 18 days of drought stress. Exogenous Spm pretreatment significantly mitigated the drought-induced decreases in total Chl, Chl a, Chl b, Fv/Fm, PIABS, Pn, Tr, Gs, and Ci, and also further increased WUE in leaves of creeping bentgrass under drought stress (Figure 2). 2.2. Effects of Spm Pretreatment on PAs Metabolism To examine whether exogenous application of Spm affected endogenous PAs levels and metabolism under drought stress, endogenous PAs content and key enzymes involved in PAs metabolism were detected. As shown in Figure 3A–D, drought stress significantly induced the accumulation of Put, Spd, Spm, and total PAs. The Spm pretreatment also significantly increased endogenous Put, Spd, Spm, and total PAs contents in leaves of creeping bentgrass under normal condition and drought stress. The Put, Spd, Spm, or PAs content in leaves of plants pretreated with the Spm increased by 42%, 77%, 122%, or 48% than that in leaves of plants without the Spm pretreatment on the 18th d of droughts stress, respectively (Figure 3A–D). As time of drought stress went on, the ADC, ODC, and S-AMDC activities gradually increased in the “D” and “D + Spm” treatment. Exogenous Spm further significantly increased stress-induced ADC, ODC and S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase (S-AMDC) activities in leaves (Figure 3E–G). Under normal condition, there were no significant differences in polyamine oxidase (PAO) activity and DAO activity between Spm-treated and untreated plants (Figure 3H,I). Drought stress caused significant increase in PAO activity and DAO activity; however, “D + Spm” treatment showed significantly lower PAO activity and higher DAO activity than the “D” treatment during drought stress (Figure 3H,I). 2.3. Effects of Spm Pretreatment on GABA Metabolism To examine whether exogenous application of Spm affected GABA metabolism under drought stress, endogenous GABA content and key enzymes involved in GABA metabolism were detected. The GABA and glutamate (Glu) contents in plants increased significantly under drought stress, and the Spm-pretreated plants exhibited significantly higher GABA and Glu contents than plants without Spm application during drought stress (Figure 4A,B). The GABA aminotransferase (GABA-T) activity significantly reduced in response to drought stress, but Spm pretreatment significantly alleviated the decrease in its activity under drought stress (Figure 4C). The glutamate decarboxylase (GAD) activity and α-ketoglutarase(α-KGDH) activity were gradually increased with the extension of drought time (Figure 4D,E). The GAD activity of Spm-pretreated plants was significantly higher than that of non-pretreated plants during drought stress (Figure 4D). In addition, the activity of α-KGDH in Spm-pretreated plants was 34% or 33% higher than that in non-pretreated plants on 12th and 18th d of drought stress, respectively (Figure 4E). 2.4. Effects of Spm Pretreatment on N Metabolism To examine whether exogenous application of Spm affected N metabolism under drought stress, different forms of N content and key enzymes involved in N metabolism were detected. Drought stress significantly improved the accumulation of NH4+ in leaves. Under drought stress, the content of NH4+ in plants with Spm pretreatment was 32% or 16% lower than that of untreated plants on the 12th or 18th day of drought stress, respectively (Figure 5A). The content of nitrite nitrogen (NO2−) decreased significantly in plants without the Spm pretreatment, however no significant change was observed in plants with the Spm pretreatment on the 12th d of drought stress. On the 18th day of drought stress, the content of NO2− in Spm-pretreated plants was significantly higher than that in non-pretreated plants (Figure 5B). The NR activity was significantly inhibited under drought stress, and its activity in plants without the Spm pretreatment decreased by 36% and 62% at 12 and 18 days of drought stress, respectively, as compared to control, but Spm pretreatment significantly alleviated the decrease in NR activity induced by drought stress (Figure 5C). Drought stress significantly increased nitrite reductase (NiR) activity and Spm pretreatment significantly inhibited the increase in NiR activity as shown in Figure 5D. In addition, the Spm pretreatment could significantly alleviate the decrease in GS and GOGAT activities during 18 days of drought stress (Figure 5E,F). The GDH activity of the plants pretreated with Spm increased by 23% than that of the plant without Spm pretreatment on 18th d of drought stress (Figure 5G). 2.5. Effects of Spm Pretreatment on Pro Metabolism To examine whether exogenous application of Spm affected Pro metabolism under drought stress, Pro content and key enzymes involved in Pro metabolism were detected. The content of free Pro in Spm-pretreated and non-pretreated plants increased sharply during drought stress. However, there was no significant difference in the Pro content between the Spm-pretreated and non-pretreated plants under normal or drought condition (Figure 6A). Drought stress significantly activated ornithine aminotransferase (OAT) and P5CS activities in both Spm-pretreated and non-pretreated plants (Figure 6B,C). There was no significant difference in OAT activity between the Spm-pretreated and non-pretreated plants under normal and drought conditions (Figure 6B), whereas the activity of P5CS in the Spm-pretreated plants was significantly higher than that in non-pretreated plants under drought stress (Figure 6C). The proline dehydrogenase (ProDH) activity decreased significantly in response to drought stress. On the 18th day of drought stress, the ProDH activity of the Spm-pretreated plants was significantly higher than that of non-pretreated plants (Figure 6D). Figure 7 showed the response of key metabolic pathways to drought stress and exogenous Spm pretreatment in leaves.