2. Results 2.1. Isomaltulose Affects Physiological and Biochemical Parameters in Rats During the entire experiments, the body weight of each rat was measured once each week. As shown in Figure 1A, there was significantly lower body weight in the group with isomaltulose compared to the control group (p < 0.05). The daily average food intake was also less in the IsoMTL group at the end of this experiment (p < 0.01), whereas the water intake showed no significant difference between two groups (Figure 1B,C). Subsequently, we determined the effect of dietary isomaltulose on glycolipid metabolism in rats. As indicated in Figure S1A–C, the levels of fasting blood glucose (FBG), fasting serum insulin (FSIns), and homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) showed no significant difference between rats with and without isomaltulose. However, the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) revealed lower blood glucose levels and faster recovery to normal levels in rats consuming isomaltulose (Figure 1D). Moreover, dietary isomaltulose significantly reduced serum triglyceride (TG) levels (p < 0.05, Figure 1E), while it did not affect serum levels of total cholesterol (TCHO), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) (Figure S1D–F). Serum level of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) showed no significant difference between two groups (p > 0.05, Figure S2). In addition, we observed no histologic lesion in the livers or colons in the rats fed with isomaltulose when compared to the control ones (Figure S3). 2.2. Isomaltulose Regulates the Diversity of Gut Microbiota To explore the effect of isomaltulose ingestion on gut microbiota, the fecal bacterial 16S rRNA sequencing was performed using the MiSeq platform. The Chao and Shannon index values were used to evaluate species diversity and richness (α-diversity) in each microbiome sample. As shown in Figure 2A,B, the Chao and Shannon index values were decreased in the rats fed with isomaltulose when compared to the control rats (p < 0.05). A principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) score plot can present a visual assessment of the ecological complexity (β-diversity) of the fecal microbiome between two groups. In the present study, the unweighted and weighted PCoA score plots showed ambiguous separations between control and IsoMTL groups (Figure 2C,D). Moreover, the samples with the same color were clustered together. These results suggested that there was a species similarity within the groups. The composition and structure of gut microbial populations in rats was analyzed at different taxonomic levels. At the phylum level, the top four bacterial phyla were Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Verrucomicrobia, and Actinobacteria, which accounted for 98.95% of the total OTU numbers (Figure 3A). Moreover, the relative abundance of Firmicutes was reduced, whereas the relative level of Bacteroidetes, Verrucomicrobia, and Actinobacteria increased by dietary isomaltulose (Figure 3A). At the genus level, the IsoMTL showed high abundance of Faecalibacterium, Lactobacillus, Akkermansia, Bacteroides, and Blautia, whereas the control group revealed high abundance of Christensenellaceae_R-7_group, Lactobacillus, Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcaceae_UCG-001, and Akkermansia (Figure 3B). To investigate specific patterns along with each microbiota and sample grouping, a heatmap profiling was performed based on relative abundance of the top 20 bacterial genera. As illustrated in Figure 3C, two distinct clusters were observed. Bacteroides, Prevotellaceaae_NK3B31_group, Faecalibacterium, Fournierella, Blautia, UBA1819, Akkermansia, Allobaculum, Phascolarctobacterium, Collinsella, Gram-negative_bacterium_Ctpy-13, and Lactobacillus were mainly clustered in the IsoMTL group. Whereas Prevotellaceae_UCG-001, Romboutsia, Lachnospiraceae_NK4A136_group, Ruminococcus_1, Ruminococceae_UCG-005, Ruminococceae_UCG-014, Christensenellaceae_R-7_group, and Ruminococceae_NK4A214_group were gathered in control group. Therefore, our data demonstrated that the consumption of isomaltulose tended to affect the composition and structure of gut microbial populations in healthy rats. 2.3. Significantly Altered Gut Microbiota at Each Taxonomic Levels by Isomaltulose To further identify significantly affected intestinal bacterial communities at each taxonomic level from phyla to genera, we carried out the LEfSe analysis. The threshold value of LDA score log 10 was set as not less than 3.5. As shown in Figure 4A,B, A total of 30 taxa exhibited an obvious difference between the control group and IsoMTL group. At the phylum level, the relative level of Actinobacteria was significantly increased in the rats fed with isomaltulose (p < 0.01), whereas the relative abundance of Patescibacteria was markedly higher in the control group (p < 0.05). In comparison with the control rats, the abundant class Negativicutes and Coriobacteriia were observably enhanced (p < 0.01), while Saccharimonadia was significantly lowered by dietary isomaltulose (p < 0.05). The relative abundance of bacterial orders Selenomonadales and Coriobacteriales were notably elevated (p < 0.01), but Saccharimonadales was significantly lower in the IsoMTL group (p < 0.05). A total of four microbial family were altered in the relative abundance between two groups. The consumption of isomaltulose sharply elevated the abundance of Acidaminococcaceae and Coriobacteriaceae (p < 0.01), but reduced the level of Christensenellaceae and Saccharimonadaceae (p < 0.01). Moreover, many bacterial genera showed significant difference between the control group and IsoMTL group. Among these microbiota, seven taxa, Faecalibacterium, Blautia, Phascolarctobacterium, Collinsella, Holdemania, UBA1819 and Flavonifractor, were dramatically enriched in IsoMTL group (p < 0.05), but eleven bacterial genera, Alloprevotella, Ruminococcaceae_UCG_013, Candidatus_Saccharimonas, Shuttleworthia, Coprococcus_2, Ruminococcaceae_NK4A214_group, Lachnospiraceae_NK4A136_group, Ruminococcaceae_UCG_005, Ruminococcus_1, Ruminococcaceae_UCG_014, and Christensenellaceae_R-7_group, were significantly decreased by isomaltulose supplementation (p < 0.05). Further, the changes in different taxonomic levels (phylum, family, and genus) were presented in Figure 5. 2.4. Predicted Functional Composition of Gut Microbiota Related to Dietary Isomaltulose Gut microbiota has various metabolic functions and activities [23]. Moreover, an in-depth understanding of intestinal microbial functionality may contribute to elaborating the potential effect of isomaltulose supplementation on host health. Thus, we predicted the functional composition of gut microbiota using PICRUSt2 based on the 16S rRNA sequencing data. There were a total of 254 metabolic functions enriched, including carbohydrate metabolism, amino acid metabolism, lipid metabolism, energy metabolism, and metabolism of cofactors and vitamins (Table S1). Among seven amino acid metabolic pathways, tyrosine, alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolisms were increased, while metabolisms of phenylalanine, glycine, serine, threonine, cysteine, and methionine, and biosynthesis of arginine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan were reduced in the IsoMTL group (Figure 6A). Five lipid metabolism pathways, including secondary bile acid biosynthesis showed higher abundance, whereas arachidonic acid metabolism was significantly reduced in the IsoMTL group (Figure 6B). Three energy metabolism, sulfur, oxidative phosphorylation, and methane metabolisms were enriched in the IsoMTL group (Figure 7A). Four carbohydrate metabolic pathways, such as starch and sucrose, galactose, fructose and mannose, and amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolisms, were elevated, but butanoate metabolism decreased in the rats fed with isomaltulose (Figure 7B). In addition, four cofactor and vitamin metabolism pathways were significantly reduced in the IsoMTL group (Figure 7C). These results indicated that dietary isomaltulose could modulate the gut microbial functionalities. 2.5. Isomaltulose Affects the Fecal Levels of Secondary Bile Acids Bile acid metabolism is closely associated with the development of gastrointestinal and metabolic diseases [24]. In the present study, the relative abundance of bile acid metabolism (secondary bile acid biosynthesis) was notably different in the rats fed with or without isomaltulose. To detect the changes in bile acid species, we performed a targeted metabolomic profiling using LC-MS. As shown in Figure 8, the concentration of cholic acid (CA) was notably higher, whereas the levels of deoxycholic acid (DCA), lithocholic acid (LCA), hyodeoxycholic acid (HDCA), and dehydrocholic acid (DHCA) were decreased in the IsoMTL group than the control group (p < 0.01). Moreover, the multiples changed in CA, DCA, LCA, HDCA and DHCA were 137.43, 129.51, 69.07, 19.86, and 1.44, respectively. In addition, the absence of taurolithocholic acid (TLCA) and glycochenodeoxycholic acid (GCDCA) was also observed in all feces samples. Therefore, these results demonstrated that dietary isomaltulose regulated bile acid metabolism and affected the composition and structure of bile acids. 2.6. Isomaltulose Affects the Fecal Levels of Short Chain Fatty Acids Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) have been closely related to host physiology [2]. In the present study, several SCFAs-producing microbes were enriched in the rats fed with isomaltulose, which thus suggested that the SCFA composition and structure might be altered in fecal samples. Herein, a targeted quantitative analysis of SCFAs, acetic acid, propionic acid and butyric acid, was performed based on fecal samples through gas chromatograph (GC). As exhibited in Figure 9, the concentrations of propionic acid and butyric acid were elevated in the rats administered with isomaltulose in comparison with the control rats (p < 0.05). In particular, propionic acid was increased 18-fold by isomaltulose supplementation. Whereas, there was no substantial difference in acetic acid between the IsoMTL group and the control group. Moreover, the concentrations of total SCFAs (the sum of acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid) revealed a significant improvement in the IsoMTL rats compared to the control group (Figure 9). Therefore, our data suggested that isomaltulose supplementation affected the levels of SCFA species.