2. Results 2.1. Actinoplanes teichomyceticus Protoplast Production and Regeneration as the Base for Genome Separation The possibility to separate genomes (and the related phenotypes) within the complex population of A. teichomyceticus can be of paramount importance for industrial purposes, to select only those members of the population actively devoted to teicoplanin production. However, the complex structure of hyphae causes the accumulation of genomes in clumps that are difficult to separate. Therefore, the productivity data collected are usually (quantitatively and qualitatively) determined by the average performance induced by the concurrence of different lineages. To efficiently separate (potentially) non-spore forming single genomes from the mycelium of A. teichomyceticus ATCC 31121, the production and regeneration of protoplasts was selected as the most promising method. The filamentous A. teichomyceticus, growing in liquid media as tough pellets consisting of aggregating hyphae, presents several cell wall modifications that can result in great resistance to lysozyme [14]. As a consequence of this peculiar growth, when treated with standard procedures for protoplast generation, the cell wall is poorly accessible to enzymatic hydrolysis, and mycelium is scarcely converted into protoplasts, thus resulting in high contamination by hyphal fragments [15]. To improve protoplast production and to reduce hyphal contamination, A. teichomyceticus mycelium was treated with a mixture of lysozyme and lipase as described in the Materials and Methods section. The efficiency of protoplast formation was assayed by microscopic enumeration at different intervals of incubation in the digestion solution. Maximum protoplast yield (106/107 protoplasts per ml culture) was achieved after incubation times ranging from 24 to 48 h (Figure 1a). In the model actinomycete S. coelicolor, mycelium development has been associated with a progressive movement of replicated chromosomes towards hyphae tips and new branching, according to a mechanism known as nucleoid migration [16,17]. The result is a homogeneous distribution of nucleoids along the whole length of the sporogenic hyphae. The segregation of single genomes within the spores is a process regulated by the ParA-ParB protein complex and follows the homogeneous distribution of nucleoids [18]. When the unfiltered protoplasts of A. teichomyceticus (containing also residual mycelium) were treated with the DNA-binding fluorescent dye 4′,6-diamidine-2-phenylindole (DAPI), fluorescent signals also confirmed such organization of the genetic material for A. teichomyceticus. Nucleoids appeared well defined and evenly distributed along the vegetative hyphae, as occurs in S. coelicolor. In contrast, according to the fluorescence intensity and to the limited dimension of the protoplasts, it was reasonable to attribute a single genome to the regenerating protoplasts (Figure 1b). The absence of fluorescence in some protoplasts could indicate absence of genetic material and therefore the impossibility to revert to mycelium. 2.2. Macroscopic and Microscopic Analysis of Hyphae-Derived and Protoplast-Derived Clones Clones regenerated from protoplasts and clones derived from simple plating of mycelium clumps did not show relevant differences in growth or in other morphological characteristics when replicated on agar plates. Similarly, when inoculated in vegetative and/or production media, hyphae-derived clones showed no variability in the phenotype; presumably, the presence of a consistent number of genomes concurred in all cases in determining an overall similar morphology (Figure 2b). On the other hand, when each independent protoplast-derived clone was inoculated in liquid media, differences in color (Figure 2a), mycelium clump dimension (Figure 2c,d), foaming and overall growth were observed. This result suggested that protoplasts were an efficient tool to separate phenotypes and that the separation was able to uncover an underlying genetically heterogeneous population. 2.3. Analysis of Teicoplanin Production and Complex Composition Teicoplanin is produced by A. teichomyceticus as a mixture of related molecules, differing in their alkyl side chain (Figure S1) [19]. For commercializing the pharmaceutical product, two different specifications exist. The first one is described in the European Pharmacopoeia (Ph. Eur.) [13], while the second one is reported in the Japanese Pharmacopoeia (J. P.) [20] (Tables S1 and S2). The bottleneck in the industrial production of teicoplanin lies in keeping the balance between the different related molecules (complex of factors) to adhere to the above reported specifications. The characteristics of the complex of factors are strictly dependent, as reported to date, on the composition of the fermentation medium and on the presence of the precursors of the different components of the complex [21]. The fermentation studies performed in this work were aimed at achieving a teicoplanin product in line with the requirements of the Ph. Eur. (an example of an HPLC profile out of the specifications, and one in compliance with the Ph. Eur. are shown in Figure 3a,b, respectively). In the analysis of teicoplanin production, 49 independent clones derived from hyphal fragments and 49 independent clones derived from protoplast regeneration, were fermented according to the protocol described in the Materials and Methods section. The overall production of teicoplanin (calculated as the sum of the main Ph. Eur. relevant components of the complex, excluding TA3, which derives from downstream processing of the product during industrial purification), and the proportion of the different related complex components were quantified. In fermentations of hyphae-generated clones, the mean teicoplanin productivity was 219.1 mg/L with a standard deviation (SD) of ± 65.9 mg/L (Table S3 of Supplementary Materials). Teicoplanin productivities ranged from a minimum of 111.0 mg/L (clone H22, Table S4) to a maximum of 373.7 mg/L (clone H39, Table S4). Teicoplanin production in protoplast-derived clones ranged from 12.6 mg/L (clone P34, Table S5) to 508.0 mg/L (clone P73, Table S5), with a mean of 282.6 mg/L and a SD of ± 110 mg/L (Table S3). Hence, compared to what was observed in hyphae-derived clones, the distribution of teicoplanin productivity in protoplast-derived clones was skewed towards both the extremes, with the appearance of both low and high producers (Figure 4, “Complex Sum” panel). According to the analysis of teicoplanin complex composition (Figure 4 and Figure S2a,b), clones producing a teicoplanin complex compliant with the Ph. Eur. represented 22.4% of the analysed hyphae-derived samples and 12.5% of the analysed protoplast-derived clones. The different factors of the teicoplanin complex were produced in variable amounts with increased variability in protoplast-derived clones (Figure 4 and Figure S2b). The analysis of correlation of the production of the different teicoplanin complex factors evidenced that TA2-1 and TA2-2 abundance in the different hyphae-generated clones were not cross-correlated and were not correlated with the abundance of the TA2-3, TA2-4 and TA2-5 factors (for details see Tables S6 and S7). However, TA2-2, being the most abundant component of the teicoplanin complex, correlated with the overall teicoplanin production (r = 0,73; p < 0.001). On the other hand, production of the TA2-3, TA2-4 and TA2-5 factors was interconnected, and also correlated with the overall teicoplanin production (Table S6). A similar outcome was observed in protoplast-generated clones (Table S7). Notably, teicoplanin minor factors, usually expressed at low level, were uncovered by the separation of protoplasts (for an example see Figure 3a the “uncharacterized” peak). Finally, four independent colonies obtained from a second protoplasting cycle from each of the original clones (see Table S5) P73 (i.e., clone with the highest productivity recorded), P75 (i.e., clone with a teicoplanin complex in compliance with the Ph. Eur.) and P41 (randomly chosen clone) (see Figure S2b and Table S5) were independently fermented. Productivities and standard deviations were respectively 511.3 ± 51.1, 334.9 ± 43.8, and 357.9 ± 20.1 mg/L. Data achieved showed good consistency among the four colonies in terms of growth, teicoplanin overall productivity (with SD in the range 5–13%) and teicoplanin complex distribution, which was consistent among the four colonies, as well as between them and the original clone from which they derived. These observations supported the genetic stability of protoplast-derived clones and, hence, the usefulness of the approach herein employed for isolating clones with desired characteristics, namely high production rate and/or compliant complex composition.