RESULTS Self-resistance determinants TxnU2/U4 and LldU1/U5 are closely related to TXNs production Previously, we identified the BGCs of TXNA (txn) and LLD (lld) and characterized their partial biosynthetic pathways including starter unit and tailoring steps (45,46,48–51), but the function of many of the proteins encoded in their BGCs are unknown. To study the repair mechanism of DNA damage arising from TXNs family of alkylating agents, we first investigated all proteins encoded within and adjacent to the TXNA and LLD BGCs (45,46). BLASTP analysis showed that TxnU2/U4 derived from txn and LldU1/U5 derived from lld belong to the HTH_42 superfamily and exhibit homology to the DNA glycosylase AlkZ with low sequence identity (26–33%) and similarity (39–46%) (Figure 1B and D). AlkZ is found within the AZB BGC and has been reported to be an essential resistance protein in AZB biosynthesis by unhooking AZB-ICLs, which would trigger the BER pathway (Figure 1C) (27). We therefore speculated that TxnU2/U4 and LldU1/U5 could confer resistance to TXNA and LLD for self-protection in the producer. To understand the function of these four proteins, the genes txnU2/U4 from the TXNA producer S. bottropensis NRRL 12051 and lldU1/U4 from the LLD producer S. vinaceusdrappus NRRL 15735 were deleted (Supplementary Figure S1), and the yield of compounds in these resulting mutants and wild-type (WT) strains were determined by LC–MS. Compared to the WT strain, the production of TXNA in gene deletion mutant strains ΔtxnU2 and ΔtxnU4 was remarkably reduced 72% and 82%, respectively, and the yield of LLD in ΔlldU1 and ΔlldU5 was also decreased 85% and 80%, respectively, suggesting the genes txnU2/txnU4 and lldU1/lldU5 are involved in compound biosynthesis and are closely related to the efficiency of TXNA and LLD production (Figure 2A and B). Figure 2.
In vivo characterization of the self-resistance determinants related to LLD and TXNA. (A) LC–MS analysis of extracts from S. bottropensis NRRL 12051 wild-type (txnWT) and mutant strains, ΔtxnU2 and ΔtxnU4, at 400 nm absorbance. (B) LC–MS profiles of extracts from S. vinaceusdrappus NRRL 15735 wild-type (lldWT) and mutant strains, ΔlldU1 and ΔlldU5, at 400 nm absorbance. The effect of txnU2/txnU4 (C) and lldU1/lldU5 (D) deletion on cells challenged with increasing concentrations of TXNA (left) and LLD (right) was tested by a disc diffusion assay. Filter paper discs spotted with different concentrations of TXNA or LLD were laid on the MS plate pre-inoculated with wild type or mutant strains. After incubation at 30°C for 36 h, resistance levels to TXNA or LLD were determined by the zone of inhibition. In vivo characterization of the self-resistance determinants related to LLD and TXNA. (A) LC–MS analysis of extracts from S. bottropensis NRRL 12051 wild-type (txnWT) and mutant strains, ΔtxnU2 and ΔtxnU4, at 400 nm absorbance. (B) LC–MS profiles of extracts from S. vinaceusdrappus NRRL 15735 wild-type (lldWT) and mutant strains, ΔlldU1 and ΔlldU5, at 400 nm absorbance. The effect of txnU2/txnU4 (C) and lldU1/lldU5 (D) deletion on cells challenged with increasing concentrations of TXNA (left) and LLD (right) was tested by a disc diffusion assay. Filter paper discs spotted with different concentrations of TXNA or LLD were laid on the MS plate pre-inoculated with wild type or mutant strains. After incubation at 30°C for 36 h, resistance levels to TXNA or LLD were determined by the zone of inhibition. To follow up this finding and further identify the in vivo function of the four proteins, the effects of txnU2/txnU4and lldU1/lldU5 deletion and overexpression on cells challenged with TXNs were tested. Disc diffusion tests indicated that gene deletion mutants ΔtxnU4, ΔlldU1 and ΔlldU5 exhibited notable sensitivity to both TXNA and LLD, but mutant ΔtxnU2 was no more sensitive to either TXNA or LLD than the WT strain (Figure 2C and D). Overexpression of txnU2/txnU4 and lldU1/lldU5 in S. lividans 1326, a TXNs-sensitive strain, increased cellular viability towards both TXNA and LLD (Figure 3A). Moreover, consistent with the growth viability in Streptomyces, the survival ratio of E. coli BL21 that overexpressed txnU4 or lldU1 against TXNA was significantly higher than control cells, while txnU2 overexpression was weakly protective, and there was no effect for lldU5 overexpression (Figure 3B). Together, these results show that TxnU2/U4 and LldU1/U5 are self-resistance determinants in TXNA and LLD producers, and among them TxnU4 and LldU1 display the major roles. Figure 3.Overexpression of TxnU2/TxnU4 and LldU1/lldU5 confer resistance to heterologous hosts against TXNA and LLD. (A) Disc diffusion test assay to determine the antibiotic sensitivity of heterologous expression strains S. lividans::pSET152, S. lividans::txnU2, S. lividans::txnU4, S. lividans::lldU1 and S. lividans::lldU5 to TXNA (left) and LLD (right). (B) TXNA inhibition of E. coli BL21 cells transformed with protein overexpression plasmid txnU2-pET28a, txnU4-pET28a, lldU1-pET28a, lldU5-pET28a or empty vector pET28a alone. Data are mean ± SD (n = 3). Overexpression of TxnU2/TxnU4 and LldU1/lldU5 confer resistance to heterologous hosts against TXNA and LLD. (A) Disc diffusion test assay to determine the antibiotic sensitivity of heterologous expression strains S. lividans::pSET152, S. lividans::txnU2, S. lividans::txnU4, S. lividans::lldU1 and S. lividans::lldU5 to TXNA (left) and LLD (right). (B) TXNA inhibition of E. coli BL21 cells transformed with protein overexpression plasmid txnU2-pET28a, txnU4-pET28a, lldU1-pET28a, lldU5-pET28a or empty vector pET28a alone. Data are mean ± SD (n = 3). TxnU2/U4 and LldU1/U5 are DNA glycosylases that excise TXNA- and LLD-DNA adducts To determine if TxnU2, TxnU4, LldU1 and LldU5 are DNA glycosylases capable of excising TXNA- and LLD-Gua adducts from DNA, an 8-bp oligodeoxynucleotide duplex d(AACCGGTT) designed based on a previous report was treated with either TXNA or LLD and then incubated with TxnU2, TxnU4, LldU1, or LldU5 (Figure 4A) (36,52). The reaction products were detected by LC–MS at 271 and 400 nm (Figure 4B, C, Supplementary Figure S2). After treatment with TXNA, two new peaks appeared at 18.2 and 18.9 minutes. The m/z of the two peaks were 1644, which was consistent with that of the [M + 2H]2+ ion of the monoalkylated adduct generated by covalent binding of one molecule TXNA to either G within the duplex d(AACCGGTT) (Supplementary Figure S2A). Given the previous sequence selectivity studies showing that TXNA reacts preferentially with the DNA sequence 5′-GT (36,52), we supposed that the product with the later retention time (18.9 min) and larger peak area is 5′-AACCG(TXNA-G)TT-3′, and the other peak at 18.2 minutes is 5′-AACC(TXNA-G)GTT-3′. As TxnU2 or TxnU4 was added, the amount of the two adducts decreased, and a new peak with m/z 1028 appeared, which was supposedly the excision product of TxnU2 and TxnU4 (Figure 4B). The molecular weight of the product is equal to that of gutingimycin, which contains a TXN skeleton and a Gua nucleobase. In addition, the molecular formula C47H57O21N5 determined by HRESIMS ([M + H]+m/z 1028.53) and the fragments detected by tandem-MS were consistent with gutingimycin (Supplementary Figure S3A), confirming that TxnU2 and TxnU4 are able to catalyze excision of TXNA-Gua adducts from DNA. An extended time course indicated that TxnU4 preferentially cleaved the 5′-AACCG(TXNA-G)TT-3′ among the two alkylated products (Supplementary Figure S4). Likewise, under the same experimental condition, the two alkylation products arising from LLD were excised by LldU1, forming a new compound with m/z 1102 in the mass spectra, whereas LldU5 showed no activity (Figure 4C, Supplementary Figure S2B). HRESIMS data ([M + H]+m/z 1102.43, calculated for C51H68O22N5) and tandem-MS analysis indicated that the excision product is LLD-Gua (Supplementary Figure S3B), suggesting LldU1 is capable of excising LLD-G adducts from DNA. Figure 4.TxnU2/4 and LldU1/5 are monofunctional DNA glycosylases that excise TXNA- and LLD-DNA adducts. (A) Chemical reaction between the epoxide moiety of TXNA or LLD and N7 of G in DNA. DNA glycosylases catalyze the hydrolysis of the N-glycosidic bond to liberate the alkylguanine adduct, generating an AP site in the DNA. (B, C) LC–MS analysis of the cleavage products of TxnU2, TxnU4, LldU1 and LldU5 reaction with TXNA-DNA (B) and LLD-DNA (C). An 8-bp oligodeoxynucleotide duplex d(AACCGGTT) was pre-incubated with TXNA or LLD at 16°C for 2 h, followed by treatment with enzymes TxnU2, TxnU4, LldU1 and LldU5 for 2 h. The reaction mixtures were analyzed by LC–MS at 400 nm absorbance. (D) Schematic of the base excision assay performed in panels E-H. DNA containing a centrally located GT dinucleotide and a 5′-Cy5-label (red circle) is incubated with TXNA or LLD to form the substrate. Incubation with TxnU2/U4 or LldU1/U5 generates an AP site, which is cleaved with hydroxide to generate β- and δ-elimination products. PUA, 3′-phospho-α,β-unsaturated aldehyde; P, 3′-phosphate. (E, F) Denaturing PAGE of TXNA-DNA (E) and LLD-DNA (F) reactions after treatment with enzyme or buffer (mock) for 30 min. Formation of the LLD-DNA substrate only went to ∼50% completion, with unreacted DNA migrating faster on the gel. Substrate and product DNA migrate as expected for their sizes, as judged by their relative position to bromophenol blue and xylene cyanol tracking dyes (Supplementary Figure S5C) (66). (G) Single- (blue) and multiple-turnover (red) excision kinetics of TxnU4 against TXNA-DNA. 50 nM TXNA-DNA was incubated with buffer (mock), 50 nM TxnU4 (1:1 protein:DNA), or 5 nM TxnU4 (1:10 protein:DNA). Data are mean ± SD (n = 3). A representative gel from which the data were quantified is shown in Supplementary Figure S5D. (H) Denaturing PAGE of TXNA-DNA adducts after 30-min incubation with TxnU4 or LldU1, followed by work-up with either H2O or NaOH. TxnU2/4 and LldU1/5 are monofunctional DNA glycosylases that excise TXNA- and LLD-DNA adducts. (A) Chemical reaction between the epoxide moiety of TXNA or LLD and N7 of G in DNA. DNA glycosylases catalyze the hydrolysis of the N-glycosidic bond to liberate the alkylguanine adduct, generating an AP site in the DNA. (B, C) LC–MS analysis of the cleavage products of TxnU2, TxnU4, LldU1 and LldU5 reaction with TXNA-DNA (B) and LLD-DNA (C). An 8-bp oligodeoxynucleotide duplex d(AACCGGTT) was pre-incubated with TXNA or LLD at 16°C for 2 h, followed by treatment with enzymes TxnU2, TxnU4, LldU1 and LldU5 for 2 h. The reaction mixtures were analyzed by LC–MS at 400 nm absorbance. (D) Schematic of the base excision assay performed in panels E-H. DNA containing a centrally located GT dinucleotide and a 5′-Cy5-label (red circle) is incubated with TXNA or LLD to form the substrate. Incubation with TxnU2/U4 or LldU1/U5 generates an AP site, which is cleaved with hydroxide to generate β- and δ-elimination products. PUA, 3′-phospho-α,β-unsaturated aldehyde; P, 3′-phosphate. (E, F) Denaturing PAGE of TXNA-DNA (E) and LLD-DNA (F) reactions after treatment with enzyme or buffer (mock) for 30 min. Formation of the LLD-DNA substrate only went to ∼50% completion, with unreacted DNA migrating faster on the gel. Substrate and product DNA migrate as expected for their sizes, as judged by their relative position to bromophenol blue and xylene cyanol tracking dyes (Supplementary Figure S5C) (66). (G) Single- (blue) and multiple-turnover (red) excision kinetics of TxnU4 against TXNA-DNA. 50 nM TXNA-DNA was incubated with buffer (mock), 50 nM TxnU4 (1:1 protein:DNA), or 5 nM TxnU4 (1:10 protein:DNA). Data are mean ± SD (n = 3). A representative gel from which the data were quantified is shown in Supplementary Figure S5D. (H) Denaturing PAGE of TXNA-DNA adducts after 30-min incubation with TxnU4 or LldU1, followed by work-up with either H2O or NaOH. For further confirmation, an in vitro gel-based assay was performed to quantify the β- and δ-elimination products generated by alkaline hydrolysis of the AP site product of base excision (Figure 4D) (28). We verified that the amount of product observed in this assay was not influenced by the use of NaOH to cleave glycosylase generated AP sites, as similar results were obtained with piperidine (Supplementary Figure S5A,B). Purified enzymes were incubated with either TXNA- or LLD-DNA substrates for 30 min under single turnover conditions. We found that all four enzymes produced a significant amount of product as compared to a no-enzyme control (Figure 4E and F). The weaker activity of LldU5 relative to the other three enzymes (Figure 4F) is likely the result of poor protein solubility observed during expression and purification. Single-turnover kinetic analysis showed that TXNA-Gua excision by TxnU4 (kst = 4.6 min–1) is approximately 4 times faster than S. sahachiroi AlkZ and E. coli YcaQ activity toward AZB-ICL (kst = 1.2 min–1) and NM-ICL (kst = 1.1 min–1) substrates, respectively (29) (Figure 4G, Supplementary Figure S5D). The enzyme also efficiently turns over (kmt = 0.3 min–1) and shows no observable product inhibition, as evidenced by multiple-turnover kinetics (Figure 4G, Supplementary Figure S5D). Thus, these enzymes excise TXNs lesions rapidly and efficiently relative to their distant orthologs. Moreover, the in vitro excision activities of TxnU2/U4 and LldU1/U5 were further confirmed by the detection of excision products in gene deletion mutant strains (Figure 2A, B). Compared to the WT strain, the production of LLD-Gua in gene deletion mutant strains ΔlldU1 and ΔlldU5 was respectively reduced 43% and 30%, and the yield of gutingimycin in ΔtxnU2 and ΔtxnU4 was also respectively decreased 95% and 99%, suggesting the glycosylases TxnU2/U4 and LldU1/U5 are functional in vivo. Monofunctional glycosylases catalyze only hydrolysis of the N-glycosidic bond, whereas bifunctional glycosylases also nick the backbone to generate β- and δ-elimination products. Based on our previous functional analysis of the homolog AlkZ, we hypothesized that TxnU and LldU enzymes were monofunctional. Indeed, similar to AlkZ, NaOH was required to nick the AP-DNA product formed by TxnU4 and LldU1 (Figure 4H). Treating the reacted TXNs-DNA with water preserved the AP site, while treatment with hydroxide cleaved the AP site to generate β- and δ- elimination products. These results indicate that the TxnU and LldU enzymes are monofunctional glycosylases and do not contain intrinsic DNA lyase activity. TxnU4 and LldU1 remove TXNs-guanine adducts with a similar but distinct catalytic motif relative to AlkZ The active sites of all monofunctional DNA glycosylases contain catalytic carboxyl (Asp, Glu) or carboxamide (Asn, Gln) residues that promote base excision by electrostatically stabilizing the positive charge that develops on the deoxyribose as the glycosidic bond is broken, and by deprotonating or positioning a water molecule for nucleophilic attack of the anomeric C1′ carbon (19–23). We previously showed that the TxnU/LldU homolog AlkZ contains a catalytic QΦQ motif (Φ is a small aliphatic residue) (Supplementary Figure S6), and that mutation of either flanking glutamine abrogates base excision of monoadducts and severely reduces ICL unhooking activities (28,29). Based on a rigid-body docking model of AlkZ in complex with AZB-DNA (28), the C-terminal glutamine side chain is likely within proximity to the lesion deoxyribose to position a catalytic water molecule (Supplementary Figure S7). Although the N-terminal glutamine is more recessed and contacts the DNA backbone of a neighboring nucleotide, a slight rotation of the DNA around the helical axis in our docking model would position this residue for catalysis on the adducted nucleotide, and thus either residue theoretically can play a catalytic role in base excision. Like AlkZ, TxnU2 and LldU5 contain a QΦQ motif, whereas TxnU4 and LldU1 contain a histidine residue (H43) in the first position (Figure 5A). Both QΦQ and HΦQ motifs are predicted to reside in the same location as those observed in AlkZ (Supplementary Figures S6 and S7), and the His imidazole should be able to perform the same catalytic function as described above for carboxylate and carboxamide side chains. We examined the functional role of the HΦQ motifs in TxnU4 and LldU1 by purifying H43A and Q45A mutants and measuring TXNA-DNA and LLD-DNA excision activity. Wild-type TxnU4 removed 94% of the TXNA-DNA adduct after 30 seconds. At this same short time point, the TxnU4 H43A mutant showed no activity, whereas substitution of Gln45 with alanine had no effect on TxnU4 activity (Figure 5B). Interestingly, we found the exact opposite effect of H43 and Q45 residues in LldU1 tested against an LLD-DNA substrate; LldU1 H43A had no effect compared to wild-type, whereas LldU1 Q45A showed no activity (Figure 5C). We also tested the activity of the QΦQ motif in LldU5; alanine substitution of either glutamine abrogated activity compared to the wild-type enzyme (Figure 5D), similar to that shown for AlkZ (28). We were unable to test the activity of TxnU2 mutants because the proteins were unstable and not amenable to purification. These results indicate that the in vitro activity we observe from purified protein is not the result of a contaminating activity in our protein preparations, and suggest that either the histidine or glutamine residues within TxnU4 and LldU1 HΦQ motifs are catalytic, and that they engage TXNA-G and LLG-G lesions differently (Supplementary Figure S7D). Figure 5.Mutational analysis of excision activity. (A) Sequence alignment of the catalytic residues in S. sahachiroi AlkZ and TxnU2/U4 and LldU1/U5. Denaturing PAGE of TxnU4/TXNA-DNA (B) and LldU1/LLD-DNA (C) Single-turnover reactions containing 1 μM protein and 50 nM DNA. WT and mutant proteins were incubated with substrates for 30 s. (D) Single turnover reactions between LldU5 enzymes and LLD-DNA were carried out for 96 h. Mutational analysis of excision activity. (A) Sequence alignment of the catalytic residues in S. sahachiroi AlkZ and TxnU2/U4 and LldU1/U5. Denaturing PAGE of TxnU4/TXNA-DNA (B) and LldU1/LLD-DNA (C) Single-turnover reactions containing 1 μM protein and 50 nM DNA. WT and mutant proteins were incubated with substrates for 30 s. (D) Single turnover reactions between LldU5 enzymes and LLD-DNA were carried out for 96 h. TXNs form stable DNA adducts that are specifically excised by TxnU and LldU glycosylases N7-alkyl-2′-deoxyguanosine adducts (e.g. 7mG) are generally thermally unstable and prone to depurination (53). We therefore explored the stability of TXNs-DNA adducts. Heating the TXNA-DNA to 95°C for 5 min, followed by either water or hydroxide workup, led to depurination of only 32% of the adduct (Figure 6A). In contrast, our previous studies show 90% depurination of N7-linked NM- and AZB-ICLs under the same conditions (29), suggesting that TXNA-DNA adducts are more stable than other N7-alkyl lesions. To test this, we directly compared the stabilities of TXNA-DNA and 7mG-DNA adducts by monitoring their spontaneous depurination rates at 37°C over a period of 7 days. We found that the TXNA-G N-glycosidic bond is at least 5 times more stable than that of 7mG (Figure 6B, Supplementary Figure S6). Thus, relative to 7mG, TXNA adducts are more resistant to spontaneous depurination, which may be an important property for TXNs toxicity. Figure 6.Substrate specificity analysis of TxnU2/TxnU4 and LldU1/5. (A, B) TXNA forms stable DNA adducts. Denaturing PAGE of TXNA-DNA adducts after thermal depurination. TXNA-DNA was heated (Δ) to 95°C for 5 min, followed by treatment with either water or NaOH. (B) Kinetics of spontaneous depurination of TNXA in DNA as compared with 7mG or unmodified G. Data are mean ± SD (n = 3). Half-lives derived from linear regression of the data are 6.1 ± 0.3 days (7mG) and 33.9 ± 8.1 days (TXNA). A representative gel from which this data was quantified is shown in Supplementary Figure S5E. (C) Denaturing PAGE of TXNA-DNA adducts after 1-h incubation with either buffer (mock) or bacterial alkyl-DNA glycosylases. (D) TxnU4 can excise LLD-DNA and LldU1 can excise TXN-G-DNA adducts. (E) Denaturing PAGE of 30-min reaction products of E. coli YcaQ and Streptomyces TxnU4 and LldU1 with 7mG-DNA. (F) Structure of nitrogen mustard (NM)-ICL produced by reaction of mechlorethamine with guanines on opposite DNA strands. (G) Schematic of ICL unhooking reactions. Strands are 5′-labeled with either FAM (green) or Cy5 (red). Unhooking by a glycosylase produces single stands containing either monoadducts or AP-sites, the latter which are susceptible to nicking by hydroxide. (H) Denaturing PAGE of NM-ICL unhooking reactions after treatment with buffer (mock) or enzyme for 30 min, followed by alkaline hydrolysis. The percent of β/δ-elimination products is quantified below the gel. Each image is an overlay of false-colored FAM (green) and Cy5 (red) fluorescence scans of the gels, in which yellow depicts coincident red and green intensity. Substrate specificity analysis of TxnU2/TxnU4 and LldU1/5. (A, B) TXNA forms stable DNA adducts. Denaturing PAGE of TXNA-DNA adducts after thermal depurination. TXNA-DNA was heated (Δ) to 95°C for 5 min, followed by treatment with either water or NaOH. (B) Kinetics of spontaneous depurination of TNXA in DNA as compared with 7mG or unmodified G. Data are mean ± SD (n = 3). Half-lives derived from linear regression of the data are 6.1 ± 0.3 days (7mG) and 33.9 ± 8.1 days (TXNA). A representative gel from which this data was quantified is shown in Supplementary Figure S5E. (C) Denaturing PAGE of TXNA-DNA adducts after 1-h incubation with either buffer (mock) or bacterial alkyl-DNA glycosylases. (D) TxnU4 can excise LLD-DNA and LldU1 can excise TXN-G-DNA adducts. (E) Denaturing PAGE of 30-min reaction products of E. coli YcaQ and Streptomyces TxnU4 and LldU1 with 7mG-DNA. (F) Structure of nitrogen mustard (NM)-ICL produced by reaction of mechlorethamine with guanines on opposite DNA strands. (G) Schematic of ICL unhooking reactions. Strands are 5′-labeled with either FAM (green) or Cy5 (red). Unhooking by a glycosylase produces single stands containing either monoadducts or AP-sites, the latter which are susceptible to nicking by hydroxide. (H) Denaturing PAGE of NM-ICL unhooking reactions after treatment with buffer (mock) or enzyme for 30 min, followed by alkaline hydrolysis. The percent of β/δ-elimination products is quantified below the gel. Each image is an overlay of false-colored FAM (green) and Cy5 (red) fluorescence scans of the gels, in which yellow depicts coincident red and green intensity. We next tested the ability of other bacterial alkylpurine DNA glycosylases to liberate gutingimycin from DNA. These glycosylases, which include E. coli AlkA and YcaQ, Bacillus cereus AlkC and AlkD, and S. sahachiroi AlkZ, have widely varying substrate specificities in addition to their ability to excise 7mG (23,28,29,40,54–56). Under the experimental conditions tested, we were unable to detect TXNA excision products from any of these glycosylases (Figure 6C), indicating that recognition of the TXNA lesion is confined to a glycosylase found in a TXNs BGC. We also compared the cross-reactivity of the TxnU and LldU enzymes by testing the ability of TxnU4 to excise LLD adducts and of LldU1 to excise TXNA adducts, and found that both TxnU4 and LldU1 are capable of excising both TXNA and LLD adducts (Figure 6D), consistent with our results from HPLC analysis (Figure 4B and C). Given the efficient activity of TxnU4 for TXNA lesions (Figure 4G), we were interested in determining whether TxnU and LldU could cleave other, less stable N7-alkyl-DNA adducts. We previously found that E. coli YcaQ readily excises 7mG (Figure 6E) and unhooks NM-ICLs generated from reaction of DNA with mechlorethamine (Figure 6F) (28,29). To our surprise, in contrast to YcaQ, neither TxnU4 nor LldU1 showed any significant activity toward 7mG (Figure 6E) or a NM-ICL (Figure 6G, H) after 30 min, despite the lower stability of these lesions relative to TXNs adducts. The inability of TxnU4 to act on these less stable N7-alkyl adducts and of other alkylpurine DNA glycosylases to process TXNA-DNA indicate that the TxnU/LldU enzymes are highly specific for their cognate natural products, and suggest that the enzymes likely recognize a specific feature of the TXNs-DNA substrates either directly through interaction with the compound or indirectly through the structural distortion to the DNA imposed by the intercalated adduct (Supplementary Figure S7). AP sites generated from TxnU4 cleavage of TXNA-DNA are inefficiently processed by EndoIV The AP site product of DNA glycosylase activity is a toxic intermediate of the BER pathway, and thus must be efficiently incised by an AP endonuclease for completion of the pathway. We therefore investigated the efficiency with which a bacterial AP endonuclease could act on the product of the TxnU4/TXNA-DNA reaction. When comparing various methods to cleave TxnU4-generated AP sites in our gel-based assay, we noticed that E. coli EndoIV did not fully incise the AP-DNA created by TxnU4 (Supplementary Figure S5A, B). The EndoIV reaction was carried out under the same conditions that show 100% incision activity from AP sites generated by AlkZ or YcaQ excision of 7mG (28,29), suggesting that the product of the TxnU4/TXNA-DNA reaction inhibits the AP endonuclease. We therefore followed up on this result by comparing the kinetics of EndoIV cleavage of AP sites generated by TxnU4/TXNA-DNA and YcaQ/7mG-DNA reactions (Figure 7). We wished to examine AP site processing without interference from residual glycosylase bound to either substrate or product DNA. Therefore, AP sites were generated under conditions that allow for completion of the glycosylase reaction with sub-saturating concentrations of protein with respect to DNA. We found that EndoIV incision of AP sites formed by YcaQ/7mG-DNA are rapidly and fully incised (kobs = 2.8 min–1) within 5 min (Figure 7). In contrast, EndoIV incision of AP sites generated from TxnU4/TXNA-DNA showed biphasic kinetics. The first phase is consistent with the first enzymatic under our experimental conditions, and showed similar kinetics (kfast = 2.0 min–1) as EndoIV activity on 7mG-produced AP sites. However, the second phase (i.e. subsequent turnovers) was 100-fold slower (kslow = 0.02 min–1), suggesting that E. coli EndoIV is product inhibited when processing TXNA-generated AP sites. More importantly, the difference in EndoIV processing of TXNA and 7mG excision products indicates a difference in AP sites generated from the two lesions, the most likely rationale for which is that gutingimycin (TXNA-Gua) remains intercalated in the DNA after glycosylase excision. These data show that the AP-DNA/TXNA-Gua product poses a challenge for processing by E. coli IV, and suggests that a specialized AP endonuclease may be required for efficient BER of these lesions. Figure 7.AP sites generated from TxnU4 action on TXNA-DNA are incised inefficiently by EndoIV. (A) Representative denaturing PAGE of EndoIV incision of AP-DNA generated from YcaQ hydrolysis of 7mG or TxnU4 hydrolysis of TXNA-G. 50 nM 7mG- or TXNA-DNA was incubated with either buffer or 5 nM YcaQ or TxnU4 for 2 h at 25°C to generate AP sites, followed by addition of EndoIV at a final concentration of 17 nM EndoIV and 40 nM DNA. EndoIV reactions were incubated at 37°C for the specified times prior to denaturing and electrophoresis. (B) Quantification of the gel in panel A. Data are mean ± SD (n = 3). 7mG data were fit to a one-phase exponential (k = 2.8 min–1, R2= 0.9975), and TXNA data were fit to a biphasic exponential (kfast = 2.0 min–1, kslow = 0.02 min–1, R2= 0.9755). AP sites generated from TxnU4 action on TXNA-DNA are incised inefficiently by EndoIV. (A) Representative denaturing PAGE of EndoIV incision of AP-DNA generated from YcaQ hydrolysis of 7mG or TxnU4 hydrolysis of TXNA-G. 50 nM 7mG- or TXNA-DNA was incubated with either buffer or 5 nM YcaQ or TxnU4 for 2 h at 25°C to generate AP sites, followed by addition of EndoIV at a final concentration of 17 nM EndoIV and 40 nM DNA. EndoIV reactions were incubated at 37°C for the specified times prior to denaturing and electrophoresis. (B) Quantification of the gel in panel A. Data are mean ± SD (n = 3). 7mG data were fit to a one-phase exponential (k = 2.8 min–1, R2= 0.9975), and TXNA data were fit to a biphasic exponential (kfast = 2.0 min–1, kslow = 0.02 min–1, R2= 0.9755).