Results Discovery of the lapcin BGC In an effort to expand the biosynthetic diversity we can interrogate for BGCs that might encode interesting bioactive natural products we have created a collection of cosmid clone libraries containing DNA extracted directly from diverse soil samples (environmental DNA, eDNA)10,11. In total, this collection contains almost 1 × 109 ~40 kb fragments of cloned eDNA. To simplify the screening and recovery of clones containing BGCs of interest, soil eDNA libraries were divided into sub-pools of ~25,000 unique clones each. In addition, to facilitate the search for NRPS BGCs in these libraries, cosmid DNA isolated from each library sub-pool was used as the template in PCR reactions with barcoded A-domain specific degenerate primers. A-domain amplicons were sequenced and the resulting reads were clustered to generate A-domain markers (natural product sequence tags, NPSTs) for NRPS BGCs captured in each library sub-pool (Fig. 1a-i). We used a two-step screening process to identify PABA-specific A-domain NPSTs. Initially, NPSTs were compared to characterized A-domain sequences using the environmental surveyor of natural product diversity (eSNaPD) software package (Fig. 1a-ii)12. eSNaPD was designed to identify sequences that are more closely related to a target domain sequence than any other sequences in GenBank, suggesting a common evolutionary ancestor and therefore a common biosynthetic product. NPSTs that showed the highest sequence identity to a known PABA-specific A-domain were retained. In a second round of screening, we took advantage of sequence differences seen in PABA-specific A-domains. NPSTs identified by eSNaPD were examined for the presence of three conserved sequences found in known PABA-specific A-domains (Fig. 1a-iii), including the presence of an alanine at position 235 in place of the aspartic acid that normally interacts with the α-amino group of an amino acid13. NPSTs that passed both filters were considered PABA-specific NPSTs and were used to generate a phylogenetic tree to guide our discovery of previously uncharacterized PABA-containing BGCs.Fig. 1Discovery of the lap gene cluster.a Overview of the PABA-specific A-domain guided discovery of the lapcin (lap) BGC from the soil metagenome. i DNA extracted from soil was used to construct metagenomic libraries. ii NPSTs generated from arrayed metagenomic libraries and iii the resulting NPSTs were searched for PABA-specific A-domains based on a signature sequence derived from known PABA A-domains. iv Phylogenetic analysis of predicted PABA NPSTs was used to identify sequences that arose from a new family of BGCs. v Clones containing NRPS BGCs of interest were recovered from the arrayed library subpools and fully sequenced to reveal BGCs that encode PABA-based natural products. b The lap BGC, which is shown here, was recovered from an archived soil metagenome library using this process. olive, resistance gene; red, NRPS biosynthesis; green, PABA tailoring; blue, thiazole formation; pink, PABA core. Fig. 1Discovery of the lap gene cluster.a Overview of the PABA-specific A-domain guided discovery of the lapcin (lap) BGC from the soil metagenome. i DNA extracted from soil was used to construct metagenomic libraries. ii NPSTs generated from arrayed metagenomic libraries and iii the resulting NPSTs were searched for PABA-specific A-domains based on a signature sequence derived from known PABA A-domains. iv Phylogenetic analysis of predicted PABA NPSTs was used to identify sequences that arose from a new family of BGCs. v Clones containing NRPS BGCs of interest were recovered from the arrayed library subpools and fully sequenced to reveal BGCs that encode PABA-based natural products. b The lap BGC, which is shown here, was recovered from an archived soil metagenome library using this process. olive, resistance gene; red, NRPS biosynthesis; green, PABA tailoring; blue, thiazole formation; pink, PABA core. Discovery of the lap gene cluster. a Overview of the PABA-specific A-domain guided discovery of the lapcin (lap) BGC from the soil metagenome. i DNA extracted from soil was used to construct metagenomic libraries. ii NPSTs generated from arrayed metagenomic libraries and iii the resulting NPSTs were searched for PABA-specific A-domains based on a signature sequence derived from known PABA A-domains. iv Phylogenetic analysis of predicted PABA NPSTs was used to identify sequences that arose from a new family of BGCs. v Clones containing NRPS BGCs of interest were recovered from the arrayed library subpools and fully sequenced to reveal BGCs that encode PABA-based natural products. b The lap BGC, which is shown here, was recovered from an archived soil metagenome library using this process. olive, resistance gene; red, NRPS biosynthesis; green, PABA tailoring; blue, thiazole formation; pink, PABA core. NPSTs that were very closely related to PABA-specific A-domains from characterized BGCs formed a clade that has representatives from many of the soils in our cosmid library (Fig. 1a-iv). In addition to this large and common clade, we identified a second smaller, soil metagenome derived clade. We predicted that NPSTs from this clade likely arose from a novel, and potentially rare, family of PABA encoding BGCs. eDNA cosmids associated with a representative NPST in this clade were recovered from the appropriate library sub-pools. Sequencing of the isolated cosmids revealed a BGC (lap) with five NRPS genes (lap b, h, k, l, m) that encode 10 modules, suggesting the production of a decapeptide (Figs. 1b and 2; Supplementary Fig. 1 and Supplementary Table 1). The edge of the lap BGC was defined by the appearance of genes predicted to be involved in primary, instead of secondary, metabolism (Supplementary Table 2).Fig. 2Bioinformatic prediction of lapcin from the lap gene cluster.a The substrate of each lapcin A-domain was inferred by comparing the 10 residues that make up the substrate binding pocket of each lapcin A-domain with characterized NRPS A-domains (red, difference between lap and known substrate binding pockets). b The structure of lapcin was predicted bioinformatically based on the NRPS modules and accessory enzymes found in the lap gene cluster. c The predicted structure of lapcin. Fig. 2Bioinformatic prediction of lapcin from the lap gene cluster.a The substrate of each lapcin A-domain was inferred by comparing the 10 residues that make up the substrate binding pocket of each lapcin A-domain with characterized NRPS A-domains (red, difference between lap and known substrate binding pockets). b The structure of lapcin was predicted bioinformatically based on the NRPS modules and accessory enzymes found in the lap gene cluster. c The predicted structure of lapcin. Bioinformatic prediction of lapcin from the lap gene cluster. a The substrate of each lapcin A-domain was inferred by comparing the 10 residues that make up the substrate binding pocket of each lapcin A-domain with characterized NRPS A-domains (red, difference between lap and known substrate binding pockets). b The structure of lapcin was predicted bioinformatically based on the NRPS modules and accessory enzymes found in the lap gene cluster. c The predicted structure of lapcin. Bioinformatic prediction The functional order of the 10 modules in lap BGC can be inferred from an analysis of domains present in each NRPS protein. Module 1 in LapM (NRPS5) contains a condensation starter (Cs) domain that is predicted to initiate peptide biosynthesis with a lipid (Supplementary Fig. 2). Almost all characterized close relatives of this Cs- domain use β-hydroxy C10 to C14 lipids (Supplementary Fig. 3). We propose that a similar lipid would be used to initiate the biosynthesis of the lap BGC product. The presence of the thioesterase (TE) domain at the end of LapH (NRPS2) indicates the lap peptide terminates at this module. The domain content of the terminal modules in the lap NRPS proteins allow us to place LapK (NRPS3) and LapL (NRPS4) between the initiating megasynthetase LapM and the terminal megasynthetase LapH. The substrate binding pocket in the penultimate A-domain of LapK is missing key conserved residues, suggesting that it is not active (Supplementary Fig. 4)8,9,14. As is seen in other BGCs with inactive A-domains, including other PABA-encoding BGCs, the isolated A-domain in LapB (NRPS1) was predicted to function in trans with LapK8,14. The substrate specificity of each NRPS module was predicted based on the 10 amino acids that makeup an A-domain substrate binding pocket13. Each lap A-domain code has an identical, or nearly identical, match among A-domains from characterized BGCs, thus allowing for a high confidence substrate prediction to be made for each A-domain (Fig. 2a). The only disagreements were at position 299 which is known to be the most variable position in the A-domain substrate binding pocket13. Four A-domains (AD4, AD8, AD9, AD10) were predicted to use PABA-like substrates. ADs 4, 8 and 10 were predicted to be specific for PABA, while AD9 was predicted to use the modified PABA substrate, 4-amino-2-hydroxy-3-isopropoxybenzoic acid (AHIBA). The use of AHIBA by at least one A-domain is supported by the presence of lap D, F, G, and C, which were predicted to encode for the hydroxylation, methylation and isomethylation of PABA (Fig. 2b). Two modules were predicted to encode cysteine-specific A-domains (AD5 and AD6). Both of these modules contain heterocyclization condensation (Cy) domains, suggesting the formation of two thiazoline rings. Furthermore, the presence of a predicted FMN-dependent dehydrogenase (LapI), suggested that ultimately the two cysteines are converted to two thiazole rings. The remaining 4 modules were predicted to introduce 4 additional proteinogenic amino acids: Ala (AD1), Ser (AD2), Ala (AD3), Asn (AD7). In the case of cystobactamid and albicidin, LapB homologs that install Asn-7, together with other tailoring enzymes that are not encoded by the lap BGC, are thought to be responsible for generating a number of different L-asparagine modifications14. As the naturally produced collections of cystobactamid and albicidin both include simple L-asparagine containing congeners that show potent activity, we included L-asparagine in our structure prediction of lapcin15,16. Taken together, this analysis allowed us to predict the product of the lap BGC as an N-acylated decapeptide containing two thiazoles, four PABAs and four proteinogenic amino acids. We have called this structure lapcin. While the right-hand tri-PABA substructure is similar to that seen in the antibiotics albicidin and cystobactamid, the majority of the structure is completely distinct from previously characterized natural products (Supplementary Table 3). In fact, no N-acylated or thiazole containing NPRS-derived PABA-based natural products have been identified in traditional natural product screening programs. As the lap BGC was cloned directly from the complex mixture of bacteria present in a soil metagenome, the exact organism from which it was cloned is not known. A BLAST search indicated that the closest relative of each individual gene found in the lap gene cluster most often arose from the genome of a myxobacterium (Supplementary Table 1). Cultured Myxobacteria are often rich in secondary metabolite BGCs. Unfortunately, most members of this group of bacteria are believed to remain uncultured17–19. Direct cloning of DNA from environmental samples as we have done here circumvents this culture bottleneck; however, it introduces the challenge of accessing metabolites encoded by captured BGCs. As our understanding of natural product biosynthesis has matured, it has become possible to make increasingly accurate predictions about the structure encoded by a BGC. Our analysis of the lap BGC suggested that lapcin was likely an accurate representation of the intended product of this BGC and that total chemical synthesis was therefore a viable method for accessing the metabolite, or at least a close analog of the metabolite encoded by the lap BGC. To be successful, a syn-BNP does not need to be a perfect copy of a natural product, only an analog that is close enough to mimic its natural biological activity. Total chemical synthesis Our retrosynthetic analysis of lapcin suggested two amide bond disconnections to give 3 fragments (A-C) that could be readily synthesized and coupled (Fig. 3). Firstly, the preparation of fragment A began with the synthesis of the peptide portion on 2-chlorotrityl chloride (CTC) resin using standard Fmoc-based solid-phase peptide synthesis (SPPS) methods (Fig. 3, Supplementary Fig. 5). With the tripeptide complete, DL-3-hydroxy myristic acid was appended to its N-terminus. NRPS derived lipopeptides are often found naturally as mixtures with different fatty acids. As there is unlikely to be one correct answer to the exact lipid found naturally on lapcin, it was synthesized using a racemic version of one of the most frequently seen lipids in NRPS derived lipopeptides, DL-3-hydroxy myristic acid. The resulting fatty-acyl tripeptide was released from the CTC resin using 20% hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) to give a protected product ready for amide coupling (1). To obtain the two thiazole rings in fragment B (Fig. 3, Supplementary Fig. 6), 4-(N-Boc-amino)phenylboronic acid (2) was initially linked to ethyl 2-bromothiazole-4-carboxylate (2-1) using a Suzuki-Miyaura coupling20. After conversion to the corresponding amide (4) and thionation by Lawesson’s reagent, a second thiazole was installed through a Hantzch thiazole synthesis (7)21. Finally, the synthesis of fragment C (Fig. 3, Supplementary Fig. 7) was started with synthesis of the alloc-protected PABA subunits from 2-hydroxy-3-isopropoxy-4-nitrobenzaldehyde (9)22. The exposed ortho hydroxyl was alloc-protected prior to oxidation of the aldehyde to a carboxylic acid of compound 11. A second alloc-protected PABA subunit (11-2) was coupled to this carboxylic acid using phosphoryl chloride (POCl3) and N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA). Tin(II) chloride (SnCl2) was used to reduce the nitro group to the free amine of compound 13, which was then coupled to 4-nitrobenzoic acid. Subsequent nitro-reduction to compound 15 followed by solution phase coupling (T3P, Py) of Boc-Asn(Trt)-OH and deprotection yielded the complete fragment C (16). Fragments A and B were connected by activating the free carboxylic acid on A with isobutyl chloroformate. After hydrolysis to the carboxylic acid, the resulting AB (S18) fragment was coupled to fragment C using HBTU-mediated amide bond formation to give the desired final protected product (S19, Supplementary Fig. 8). After deprotection, lapcin was purified by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and its structure confirmed by 1 and 2D NMR spectroscopy as well as HRMS (Supplementary Fig. 9–30).Fig. 3Overview of the synthesis of lapcin.Lapcin was synthesized in three fragments A–C which were coupled using a series of amid bond forming reactions. i Coupling fragment AB (S18): isobutyl chloroformate, TEA, THF. ii Coupling AB (S18) to fragment C (16): HBTU, DIPEA, DMF. Fig. 3Overview of the synthesis of lapcin.Lapcin was synthesized in three fragments A–C which were coupled using a series of amid bond forming reactions. i Coupling fragment AB (S18): isobutyl chloroformate, TEA, THF. ii Coupling AB (S18) to fragment C (16): HBTU, DIPEA, DMF. Overview of the synthesis of lapcin. Lapcin was synthesized in three fragments A–C which were coupled using a series of amid bond forming reactions. i Coupling fragment AB (S18): isobutyl chloroformate, TEA, THF. ii Coupling AB (S18) to fragment C (16): HBTU, DIPEA, DMF. Heterologous expression In addition to synthesizing lapcin, we also tried to access the metabolite encoded by the lap gene cluster using a biological system (Supplementary Fig. 31). The two overlapping eDNA cosmids containing the lap BGC were assembled into a contiguous fragment of DNA using transformation association recombination (TAR) in yeast. The TAR assembly reaction was carried out using pTARa4, a broad host range yeast artificial chromosome (YAC): bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) shuttle vector that is capable of being introduced into a wide range of bacterial taxa. For heterologous expression purposes, the lap BGC-containing BAC, pTARa4-lap, was either electroporated or conjugated into Myxococcus xanthus DK1622, Streptomyces albus J1074, Streptomyces coelicolor M1152, and Pseudomonas putida KT244023,24. Culture broth extracts from strains transformed with either pTARa4-lap or the empty pTARa4 shuttle vector were compared by high resolution liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (HR-LCMS) to look for lap BGC-specific metabolites. Unfortunately, none of these strains, even when grown under multiple culture conditions, produced any detectable lap BGC-specific metabolites. This was not particularly surprising in light of the fact that most natural product BGCs are silent in the laboratory and that is the key reason for exploring a syn-BNP approach for accessing bioactive small molecules from the genetic instructions contained in bacterial BGCs. Biological activity and model of action As an initial step to assess lapcin’s bioactivity, we assayed lapcin for toxicity against diverse microbial pathogens and human cancer cell lines. At the highest concentration we tested, lapcin showed no antimicrobial or antifungal activity (Supplementary Table 4). It was, however, found to be a potent human cancer cell line toxin (Table 1, Supplementary Table 5, Supplementary Figs. 32–35). Previously reported NRPS-derived PABA-based natural products (i.e., albicidin and cystobactamid) are polymer antibiotics that inhibit the bacterial DNA gyrase9,25. Self-resistance to these antibiotics is provided by a pentapeptide repeat protein (PRP) encoded in the producing BGC8,9,26. PRPs are a large class of proteins with conserved, tandemly repeated amino acids. The function of most PRPs is unknown; however, one role that has been assigned to them is protection of topoisomerases against small molecule toxins27,28. Small molecules encoded by BGCs that contain PRP genes have been shown to have activity against both prokaryotic and eukaryotic topoisomerases26 The gene directly adjacent to lapB (NRPS1) was predicted to encode a PRP, LapA (Fig. 1b), suggesting that lapcin might also be a topoisomerase inhibitor. To explore this hypothesis, we tested the activity of lapcin against bacterial DNA gyrase as well as the two major human topoisomerases (Topo I and II) using in vitro DNA relaxation (DNA gyrase, Topo I) and decatenation (Topo II) assays. Lapcin showed weak activity against DNA gyrase (IC50 > 20.5 μM, Supplementary Fig. 36), which likely explains its lack of antibacterial activity when applied extracellularly. The lapA gene may be retained in the lap BGC to provide protection against low level bacterial DNA gyrase activity while the natural product remains in the cell of the producing bacterium. While only weakly active against DNA gyrase, lapcin was a potent of inhibitor of both DNA relaxation by topoisomerase I (IC50 2.17 μM) and DNA decatenation by topoisomerase II (IC50 7.53 μM) (Fig. 4, Supplementary Fig. 37). This is 14 times more potent than the alkaloid camptothecin upon which a number of clinically used topoisomerase I inhibitors are based (IC50 30.4 μM), and almost 15 times more potent than the clinically used topoisomerase II inhibitor etoposide (IC50 108 μM) (Fig. 4). Compounds that block topoisomerases either inhibit the catalytic activity of the enzyme (an inhibitor) or increase the level of topoisomerase-mediated DNA cleavage (a poison). When we examined lapcin’s activity in topoisomerase I and II DNA cleavage assays, we did not observe the accumulation of a cleavage product in either assay (e.g., nick DNA in Topo I assay or linear DNA in Topo II assay), suggesting enzyme inhibition as its mechanism of action. Topoisomerase inhibitors are a mixed group of compounds that either intercalate DNA thereby interfering with the binding between DNA and topoisomerase or disrupt topoisomerase catalytic activity by binding the enzyme itself. As intercalators interact with the DNA substrate and not the enzyme their inhibitory activity is largely independent of enzyme concentration. Unlike known DNA intercalators, lapcin’s activity showed a strong dependence on enzyme concentration in both Topo I and II activity assays (Supplementary Fig. 38). Taken together these data indicate lapcin is a dual Type I and II topoisomerase catalytic inhibitor that inhibit the catalytic activity of both enzymes.Table 1Lapcin activity against human cell lines.Cancer typeIC50 (nM)Cell lineLapcinEtoposideCamptothecinColon cancer HT290.5169,61022.3 Colo2050.504>54,40095.7 HCT116923>54,400129 SW48037.226,900284Breast cancer MCF 735.1333>29,200 HCC18062123,33019.6Lung cancer A5492.6679.917.6 NCI-H12990.016871615.0 NCI-H22624121728.5Other Hela (Cervical)0.9861,51062.6 U2OS (Bone)1.291,840172Normal cell HEK29348.472919.2Note: IC50s were rounded to three significant figures. n = 3 biologically independent cells.Fig. 4Topoisomerase inhibition by lapcin.a Type I topoisomerase DNA relaxation assay (SC, supercoil plasmid) b Type II topoisomerase DNA decatenation assay (KDNA, Kineotoplast DNA). c Type I and d II topoisomerase inhibition plots. n = 3 independent assays. Mean value and SD are shown. Lapcin activity against human cell lines. Cancer type IC50 (nM). Cell line Lapcin Etoposide Camptothecin. Colon cancer. HT29 0.516 9,610 22.3. Colo205 0.504 >54,400 95.7. HCT116 923 >54,400 129. SW480 37.2 26,900 284. Breast cancer. MCF 7 35.1 333 >29,200. HCC1806 212 3,330 19.6. Lung cancer. A549 2.66 79.9 17.6. NCI-H1299 0.0168 716 15.0. NCI-H226 241 217 28.5. Other. Hela (Cervical) 0.986 1,510 62.6. U2OS (Bone) 1.29 1,840 172. Normal cell. HEK293 48.4 729 19.2. Note: IC50s were rounded to three significant figures. n = 3 biologically independent cells. Fig. 4Topoisomerase inhibition by lapcin.a Type I topoisomerase DNA relaxation assay (SC, supercoil plasmid) b Type II topoisomerase DNA decatenation assay (KDNA, Kineotoplast DNA). c Type I and d II topoisomerase inhibition plots. n = 3 independent assays. Mean value and SD are shown. Topoisomerase inhibition by lapcin. a Type I topoisomerase DNA relaxation assay (SC, supercoil plasmid) b Type II topoisomerase DNA decatenation assay (KDNA, Kineotoplast DNA). c Type I and d II topoisomerase inhibition plots. n = 3 independent assays. Mean value and SD are shown. Lapcin was a nM to pM (IC50) inhibitor of the cell lines we tested. These included breast, lung, colon, bone and cervical cancer cell lines. Lapcin was more potent than the topoisomerase II inhibitor etoposide against all of the cell lines we tested, with the exception of the lung cancer cell NCI-H226, against which it was essentially equipotent. Similarly, with the exception of a few cell lines (HCT116, HCC1806 and NCI-H226) lapcin was more potent than the topoisomerase I inhibitor camptothecin. Consistent with its in vitro topoisomerase inhibition, we saw a general correlation between lapcin activity and reported p53 expression levels in the cancer cell lines we tested29–31. Cell lines expressing wild-type p53 (HCT116, H226, MCF7) tended to show higher IC50s than p53 reduced cell lines (NCI-H1299, HT29, Colo205, Hela)29,32–34. This correlation was not perfect; for example, the breast cancer cell line HCC1806 is reported to express negligible p53 and the non-small cell lung cancer cell line A549 is reported to express wild type p5332. Lapcin was most active (IC50 16.8 pM) against NCI-H1299, a non-small cell lung cancer cell line that lacks the expression of p53 protein. In the case of the human bone osteosarcoma epithelial cell line U2OS, both anticancer agents we tested as controls showed elevated IC50s, while lapcin retained potent activity.