RESULTS A heterotetradecameric ClpP1P2 complex interacts with ClpX, ClpC1, and ClpC2 for protein degradation. To investigate the composition and molecular function of the Streptomyces Clp protease in vitro, we first cloned, heterologously expressed, and purified the S. hawaiiensis Clp proteins ClpP1 and ClpP2, their corresponding Clp-ATPase proteins ClpX, ClpC1, and ClpC2, as well as the predicted natural Clp protease substrates ClgR and PopR. We then performed in vitro degradation experiments by testing different combinations of ClpP and Clp-ATPase proteins to attempt the digestion of the natural substrates ClgR and PopR as well as the model protein substrates FITC-casein and β-casein, respectively. Our data show that neither ClpP1 nor ClpP2 alone was capable of protein degradation in the presence of a Clp-ATPase (Fig. 1B and C). However, when ClpP1, ClpP2, and Clp-ATPase were used in combination, protein substrates were rapidly digested, thus indicating that both ClpP1 and ClpP2 are required for Clp-ATPase-dependent protein degradation. Of note, not all protein substrates were degraded by all Clp-ATPase combinations or with similar efficiency. When we tested the degradation of ClgR and PopR by ClpP1 plus ClpP2 in the presence of either ClpX, ClpC1, or ClpC2, we observed that the presence of ClpX or ClpC2 leads to the degradation of both ClgR and PopR, although degradation was notably slower with ClpC2, whereas ClpC1 only conferred the degradation of ClgR but not of PopR (Fig. S1A). The model substrates β-casein and FITC-casein were digested by ClpP1 plus ClpP2 in the presence of either ClpC1 or ClpC2 but not when ClpX was present (Fig. S1B and C). Apparently, the stimulation of activity upon combining ClpP1 and ClpP2 points to the formation of a heterotetradecameric complex consisting of both ClpP homologs. To investigate a potential direct interaction of ClpP1 and ClpP2, we performed coelution and native PAGE experiments using native ClpP1 and C-terminally His6-tagged ClpP2. During metal-ion affinity chromatography, ClpP1 was retained on the column by His6-tagged ClpP2 (Fig. 1D), implying a direct interaction of ClpP1 and ClpP2. However, the interaction within the heteromeric ClpP1P2 complex seemed rather weak, and the complex did not appear on standard native gels. To investigate this interaction further and substantiate the existence of a heterotetradecameric complex, we next performed cross-linking experiments using the chemical cross-linker BS3 to stabilize potential transient and weak interactions between both ClpP homologs. Now, the complex was clearly shown and only the combination of both ClpP1 and ClpP2 allowed for the detection of a tetradecameric complex, as documented by native PAGE and immunoblotting analyses using anti-Streptomyces ClpP1 and anti-His6 antibodies (Fig. 1E). In contrast, when ClpP1 or ClpP2 were used individually, no tetradecameric complexes were observed. Hence, our data show that the proteolytic core of the Streptomyces Clp protease consists of a ClpP1P2 heterotetradecameric complex that interacts with the Clp-ATPases ClpX, ClpC1, and ClpC2 for the degradation of protein substrates (Fig. 1F). ClpP1 confers proteolytic activity to the complex, and ClpP2 interacts with the unfoldases ClpX, ClpC1, and ClpC2. Due to the observed heteromeric nature of the Streptomyces ClpP core, which consists of the two distinct homologs ClpP1 and ClpP2, we wondered whether both ClpP1 and ClpP2 equally contribute to Clp-ATPase-dependent proteolysis or whether each homolog may fulfill certain, distinct functions during the degradation process. To approach this question, we first analyzed the catalytic activity of the heterotetradecameric wild-type ClpP1P2 complex compared to combinations with the corresponding catalytic triad mutants ClpP1S113A and ClpP2S131A, which had been constructed by replacing the nucleophilic serine moiety of the catalytic triad by an alanine residue via site-directed mutagenesis. Of note, both ClpP1 and ClpP2 of S. hawaiiensis comprise canonical Ser-His-Asp catalytic triads, analogous to S. lividans and S. coelicolor (Fig. S1D), but are different from ClpP1 from Listeria monocytogenes. Listeria ClpP1 features an uncommon asparagine residue instead of aspartate at position 172 that aligns to an active catalytic triad only when ClpP1 forms a complex with ClpP2 (32). Studying the turnover of the fluorogenic model substrate casein in the presence of S. hawaiiensis ClpC1, we observed that a mixed core of ClpP1 and ClpP2S131A retained full proteolytic activity at the level of wild-type ClpP1P2 (Fig. 2A). This was in clear contrast to the mixed complexes ClpP1S113AP2 or ClpP1S113AP2S131A, in which protease activity was abolished for both, thus showing that the catalytic activity of the Clp complex is essentially conferred by ClpP1. FIG 2ClpP1 and ClpP2 have different but complementary functions during protein degradation. (A) Impact of mutating the active site serine moieties in the ClpP1P2 heterocomplex. ClpP1S113A but not ClpP2S131A impairs ClpC1-mediated FITC-casein degradation, indicating that substrate protein hydrolysis is conferred by ClpP1. (B) Effect of the hydrophobic pocket mutations in ClpP1hp and ClpP2hp on ClpC1-mediated FITC-casein degradation. Mutations in the hydrophobic pocket of ClpP2hp prevent FITC-casein degradation, while for ClpP1hp degradation is comparable to the wild-type protein, implying that the Clp-ATPase ClpC1 binds via ClpP2. For A and B, the hydrolysis of FITC-casein was recorded as RFU increase over time. Mean values (normalized to %) of initial linear reaction kinetics of the degradation curves are shown. P values were calculated with one-way ANOVA using three biological replicates each comprising three technical replicates. ns, P > 0.05; ****, P ≤ 0.0001. Error bars indicate standard deviations. (C and D) Effects of the hydrophobic pocket mutations on ClpC2-mediated degradation of β-casein (C) and ClpX-mediated degradation of ClgR (D). SDS-PAGE analyses show that protein degradation is inhibited in samples harboring the hydrophobic pocket mutant ClpP2hp, whereas samples with ClpP1hp retain wild-type activity, indicating that the Clp-ATPases ClpC2 and ClpX also interact via ClpP2. All assays were performed at least in triplicates, and representative SDS-PAGE images are shown. ClpP1 and ClpP2 have different but complementary functions during protein degradation. (A) Impact of mutating the active site serine moieties in the ClpP1P2 heterocomplex. ClpP1S113A but not ClpP2S131A impairs ClpC1-mediated FITC-casein degradation, indicating that substrate protein hydrolysis is conferred by ClpP1. (B) Effect of the hydrophobic pocket mutations in ClpP1hp and ClpP2hp on ClpC1-mediated FITC-casein degradation. Mutations in the hydrophobic pocket of ClpP2hp prevent FITC-casein degradation, while for ClpP1hp degradation is comparable to the wild-type protein, implying that the Clp-ATPase ClpC1 binds via ClpP2. For A and B, the hydrolysis of FITC-casein was recorded as RFU increase over time. Mean values (normalized to %) of initial linear reaction kinetics of the degradation curves are shown. P values were calculated with one-way ANOVA using three biological replicates each comprising three technical replicates. ns, P > 0.05; ****, P ≤ 0.0001. Error bars indicate standard deviations. (C and D) Effects of the hydrophobic pocket mutations on ClpC2-mediated degradation of β-casein (C) and ClpX-mediated degradation of ClgR (D). SDS-PAGE analyses show that protein degradation is inhibited in samples harboring the hydrophobic pocket mutant ClpP2hp, whereas samples with ClpP1hp retain wild-type activity, indicating that the Clp-ATPases ClpC2 and ClpX also interact via ClpP2. All assays were performed at least in triplicates, and representative SDS-PAGE images are shown. Aside from catalytic activity, the interaction with partner Clp-ATPases, which unfold and feed protein substrates into the ClpP degradation chamber, is a prerequisite for the proteolytic activity of the Clp protease. Therefore, we also probed the interaction of ClpP1 and ClpP2 with the cognate Clp-ATPases by generating particular hydrophobic pocket mutations, which had previously been shown to abrogate Clp-ATPase binding to the ClpP core in the related M. tuberculosis (MtClpP) (33). The corresponding three conserved aromatic residues (Y74, Y76, and F96) in the crystal structure of E. coli ClpP (EcClpP) are also important for stabilizing Clp-ATPase interactions with ClpP (8), and the same positions were also shown to be involved in the binding of ADEP to E. coli and B. subtilis ClpP (34, 35). By aligning the protein sequences of S. hawaiiensis and S. lividans ClpP1 and ClpP2 with EcClpP and MtClpP1P2 (Fig. S1D and E), we identified the corresponding amino acid positions in both Streptomyces ClpP1 and ClpP2. To abrogate potential Clp-ATPase/ClpP interactions, but avoid substantial interference with protein structure and folding, suitable amino acids for exchange were selected according to the physicochemical properties and size of the amino acids, i.e., the bulky, aromatic tyrosine was replaced by a valine, whereas the smaller, hydrophilic serine was replaced by an alanine, yielding the hydrophobic pocket mutant proteins ClpP1hp (Y76V, Y78V, and Y98V) and ClpP2hp (S94A, Y96V, and Y116V) (Fig. S1D and E). When different combinations of wild-type and hydrophobic pocket mutant proteins of ClpP1 and ClpP2 were used in in vitro degradation assays, it emerged that protein substrates were only digested in the presence of wild-type ClpP2, no matter which of the three ATPases was tested (Fig. 2B to D). Mutagenesis of the ClpP2 hydrophobic pocket residues resulted in complete inhibition of substrate turnover. In contrast, the corresponding mutations in ClpP1hp did not affect protein degradation, and substrate turnover was comparable to the wild-type protein, indicating that the partner Clp-ATPases bind to the heterotetradecamer exclusively via ClpP2. Hence, our data clearly show that ClpP1 and ClpP2 of the heterotetradecameric ClpP core fulfill separate but complementary functions in the degradation process. ClpP1 confers catalytic activity to the complex, while ClpP2 is essential for the necessary interaction with the partner Clp-ATPases. ADEP antibiotics induce oligomerization and proteolytic activation of ClpP1 but not of ClpP2. S. hawaiiensis is the producer of the natural product antibiotic ADEP1 (Fig. 3A) (26), and Mazodier and colleagues (36) demonstrated in a previous S. lividans cell study that ClpP1 is targeted by this antibiotic. We therefore set out to further investigate the effect of ADEP antibiotics on the Clp system of the producer genus and to characterize the potential deregulation of the in vitro peptidase and protease activity of S. hawaiiensis ClpP1 and ClpP2 in the presence of ADEP1. To do so, we first used the fluorogenic dipeptide Suc-Leu-Tyr-aminomethylcoumarin (Suc-LY-AMC) as a substrate in peptidase activity assays and measured the fluorescence signal that results from peptide cleavage and concomitant AMC release. Our results showed that neither ClpP1, ClpP2, nor ClpP1P2 possessed notable peptidase activity in the absence of ADEP1. However, ADEP1 clearly induced the hydrolysis of Suc-LY-AMC by either ClpP1 alone or by the mixed complex ClpP1P2 but not by ClpP2 alone (Fig. 3B and C). Corroborating our results above, peptidase activity was lost in all assays when ClpP1 was replaced by the active site mutant protein ClpP1S113A, while replacing ClpP2 by ClpP2S131A had no effect on the activity of mixed complexes (Fig. 3B). A similar result was observed, when Z-GGL-AMC, Ac-WLA-AMC, or Ac-Ala-hArg-2-Aoc-ACC was used as the substrate in peptidase activity assays (Fig. 3D), although some peptidase activity of ClpP1P2 was notable when using Ac-WLA-AMC in the absence of ADEP1. Probing the binding site, ADEP1 failed to induce peptide hydrolysis when ClpP1 was exchanged by the hydrophobic pocket mutant protein ClpP1hp, whereas replacement of ClpP2 by ClpP2hp had no effect on substrate hydrolysis by the mixed complex (Fig. 3B). These results indicate that ADEP1 interacts with ClpP1, but not with ClpP2. Thermal shift assays confirmed the binding affinity of ClpP1 toward ADEP1, demonstrated by an increase of >16°C in the melting temperature of the homotetradecamer in combination with ADEP1. In contrast, ADEP1 could not increase the melting temperature of ClpP2, hereby confirming that ClpP2 does not interact with ADEP1 (Fig. 3E and Fig. S2A). Such observed asymmetric binding was not restricted to ADEP1 but was also detected for ADEP2 and ADEP4, two synthetic derivatives previously optimized for potent anti-S. aureus activity (27). Uniformly, all tested ADEPs induced peptidase activity via binding to ClpP1 but not to ClpP2 (Fig. 3B and F). Interestingly, ClpP1P2 exhibited slightly higher peptidase activity when activated by ADEP1, compared to ADEP2 and ADEP4, thereby indicating that the binding of the natural compound ADEP1 to Streptomyces ClpP1 may have been evolutionarily optimized. Mixed ClpP1P2, ClpP1P2S131A, and ClpP1P2hp exhibited superior peptidase activity in the presence of ADEP1 compared to ClpP1 alone (Fig. 3B), implying a stimulation of ClpP1 catalytic activity by the interaction with ClpP2. Of note, the presence of ADEP-ClpP1P2 complexes was verified by native PAGE and size exclusion chromatography (Fig. S2B to F). Similar results were observed in protease activity assays using fluorogenic FITC-casein as a substrate and measuring FITC release upon casein degradation (Fig. 3G). In addition, here, ADEP1 induced proteolysis of casein by either ClpP1 alone or by mixed ClpP1P2 but not by ClpP2, and again the mixed complex performed better than ClpP1 alone. Thus, our data reveal that ADEP1 activates the purified and otherwise dormant Streptomyces ClpP core to Clp-ATPase-independent peptidase and protease activity by binding to and deregulating the activity of ClpP1. FIG 3ADEP binds to and deregulates ClpP1 but not ClpP2. (A) Chemical structures of the natural product ADEP1 and its synthetic congeners ADEP2 and ADEP4. ADEP1, representing “factor A” of the A54556 antibiotic complex produced by S. hawaiiensis NRRL 15010, consists of a macrolactone core, an aliphatic side chain, and an N-acylphenylalanine linker. Differences in the chemical structures between these ADEP derivatives are indicated in gray. (B to E) Effect of ADEP on the peptidase activity of ClpP1 and ClpP2. Peptidase activity assays using the fluorogenic dipeptide Suc-LY-AMC as the substrate show that in the absence of ADEP1 (DMSO controls), ClpP1 and ClpP2 alone or combined are devoid of peptidase activity. (B) Addition of ADEP1 triggered peptidase activity of ClpP1 alone and, even stronger, of the ClpP1P2 heterocomplex, while ClpP2 alone remained inactive. Peptide hydrolysis was prevented in samples containing the catalytic triad or hydrophobic pocket mutant proteins ClpP1S113A or ClpP1hp, respectively, but not in the corresponding ClpP2 mutants, thus indicating ADEP1 binding via ClpP1. The slopes of initial degradation rates are shown, normalized in %. (C) Elevated concentrations of ADEP1 (100 μM or 200 μM) did not lead to detectable peptidase activity of ClpP2 (4 μM). ClpP1 served as a positive control. The slopes of initial degradation rates are shown (normalized in %; ClpP1 activity set to 100%). The right panel is the magnified area near the baseline (y axis from −0.5% to 1%). ClpP1 activity without ADEP is only 0.15% of the ClpP1 activity in the presence of ADEP. (D) Peptidase assays using the fluorogenic peptide substrates Z-GGL-AMC, Ac-WLA-AMC, and Ac-Ala-hArg-2-Aoc-Acc confirm that peptidase activity is mediated by ClpP1 but not by ClpP2. (E) Thermal shift assays confirmed the binding affinity of ClpP1 toward ADEP1, demonstrated by an increase of 16.27°C in the melting temperature of the homotetradecamer in combination with ADEP1. In contrast, ADEP1 could not increase the melting temperature of ClpP2, hereby confirming that ClpP2 does not interact with ADEP1. (F) Peptidase assays using the derivatives ADEP2 and ADEP4 in comparison to ADEP1. The data indicate that asymmetric binding to ClpP1 is not restricted to ADEP1 but occurs also for ADEP2 and ADEP4. Of note, ClpP1P2 exhibited slightly higher peptidase activity in the presence of ADEP1 compared to ADEP2 and ADEP4. (G) Effect of ADEP1 on the protease activity of ClpP1 and ClpP2 using FITC-casein as a substrate. ADEP1 activated casein degradation by ClpP1 alone and even more by the ClpP1P2 heterocomplex, while ClpP2 alone remained inactive. DMSO was used in control reactions. Mean values (normalized to %) of initial linear reaction kinetics are given. In B to F, error bars represent standard deviations. Statistical analyses were performed with one-way ANOVA using three biological replicates each comprising three technical replicates, except for the Suc-LY-AMC degradation assays with the hydrophobic pocket mutants ClpP1hp and ClpP2hp, where two biological replicates were used. ns, P > 0.05; ****, P ≤ 0.0001. Error bars indicate standard deviations. (H) Oligomeric state analyses of native ClpP1 and native ClpP2 as determined by size exclusion chromatography. ADEP1 triggered the shift of the ClpP1 peak, potentially indicating a transformation from the compressed form of the ClpP1 tetradecamer to its active, extended form, which would explain the independent peptidase and protease activity of ADEP1-activated ClpP1. In contrast, the peak of ClpP2 did neither significantly shift nor form homotetradecamers in the presence of ADEP1. DMSO was used as a control. Depicted experiments are representatives of three biological replicates. ADEP binds to and deregulates ClpP1 but not ClpP2. (A) Chemical structures of the natural product ADEP1 and its synthetic congeners ADEP2 and ADEP4. ADEP1, representing “factor A” of the A54556 antibiotic complex produced by S. hawaiiensis NRRL 15010, consists of a macrolactone core, an aliphatic side chain, and an N-acylphenylalanine linker. Differences in the chemical structures between these ADEP derivatives are indicated in gray. (B to E) Effect of ADEP on the peptidase activity of ClpP1 and ClpP2. Peptidase activity assays using the fluorogenic dipeptide Suc-LY-AMC as the substrate show that in the absence of ADEP1 (DMSO controls), ClpP1 and ClpP2 alone or combined are devoid of peptidase activity. (B) Addition of ADEP1 triggered peptidase activity of ClpP1 alone and, even stronger, of the ClpP1P2 heterocomplex, while ClpP2 alone remained inactive. Peptide hydrolysis was prevented in samples containing the catalytic triad or hydrophobic pocket mutant proteins ClpP1S113A or ClpP1hp, respectively, but not in the corresponding ClpP2 mutants, thus indicating ADEP1 binding via ClpP1. The slopes of initial degradation rates are shown, normalized in %. (C) Elevated concentrations of ADEP1 (100 μM or 200 μM) did not lead to detectable peptidase activity of ClpP2 (4 μM). ClpP1 served as a positive control. The slopes of initial degradation rates are shown (normalized in %; ClpP1 activity set to 100%). The right panel is the magnified area near the baseline (y axis from −0.5% to 1%). ClpP1 activity without ADEP is only 0.15% of the ClpP1 activity in the presence of ADEP. (D) Peptidase assays using the fluorogenic peptide substrates Z-GGL-AMC, Ac-WLA-AMC, and Ac-Ala-hArg-2-Aoc-Acc confirm that peptidase activity is mediated by ClpP1 but not by ClpP2. (E) Thermal shift assays confirmed the binding affinity of ClpP1 toward ADEP1, demonstrated by an increase of 16.27°C in the melting temperature of the homotetradecamer in combination with ADEP1. In contrast, ADEP1 could not increase the melting temperature of ClpP2, hereby confirming that ClpP2 does not interact with ADEP1. (F) Peptidase assays using the derivatives ADEP2 and ADEP4 in comparison to ADEP1. The data indicate that asymmetric binding to ClpP1 is not restricted to ADEP1 but occurs also for ADEP2 and ADEP4. Of note, ClpP1P2 exhibited slightly higher peptidase activity in the presence of ADEP1 compared to ADEP2 and ADEP4. (G) Effect of ADEP1 on the protease activity of ClpP1 and ClpP2 using FITC-casein as a substrate. ADEP1 activated casein degradation by ClpP1 alone and even more by the ClpP1P2 heterocomplex, while ClpP2 alone remained inactive. DMSO was used in control reactions. Mean values (normalized to %) of initial linear reaction kinetics are given. In B to F, error bars represent standard deviations. Statistical analyses were performed with one-way ANOVA using three biological replicates each comprising three technical replicates, except for the Suc-LY-AMC degradation assays with the hydrophobic pocket mutants ClpP1hp and ClpP2hp, where two biological replicates were used. ns, P > 0.05; ****, P ≤ 0.0001. Error bars indicate standard deviations. (H) Oligomeric state analyses of native ClpP1 and native ClpP2 as determined by size exclusion chromatography. ADEP1 triggered the shift of the ClpP1 peak, potentially indicating a transformation from the compressed form of the ClpP1 tetradecamer to its active, extended form, which would explain the independent peptidase and protease activity of ADEP1-activated ClpP1. In contrast, the peak of ClpP2 did neither significantly shift nor form homotetradecamers in the presence of ADEP1. DMSO was used as a control. Depicted experiments are representatives of three biological replicates. Oligomerization and activity of ClpP1 and ClpP2 wild-type proteins as well as ADEP/Clp-ATPase binding site mutants. (A) Exemplary melting curves for ClpP1 and ClpP2 with ADEP1 or DMSO (see also Fig. 3E). Whereas ADEP1 increased the melting temperature of ClpP1 by 16.27°C (±0.97°C), the melting temperature of ClpP2 did not change in the presence of ADEP1 (B) Native PAGE, ClpP:ADEP ratio 1:3. On native PAGE gels, proteins bands with the size of tetradecamers (indicated by an arrow) were only observed in the presence of ADEP1 for samples comprising ClpP1P2 or ClpP1 alone. Immunoblotting using anti-ClpP1 or anti-6His antibodies identified those bands as ClpP1 homotetradecamers. Despite similar ClpP1 concentrations, the band of the ClpP1 homotetradecamer detected in the ADEP-ClpP1P2 sample appeared weaker on the native PAGE gel compared to the ADEP-ClpP1 sample. No protein bands with the size of tetradecamers were observed in the absence of ADEP1. However, immunoblotting using anti-6His antibodies detected heptameric ClpP2 in both samples ClpP1P2 and ClpP2 in the absence and presence ADEP1. (C) Native PAGE, ClpP:ADEP ratio 1:1.25. With the use of decreased ADEP1 concentrations (ADEP1:ClpP1/ClpP2 ratio of 1.25:1), a tetradecamer band in the ClpP1P2 sample was no longer detectable, whereas ClpP1 homotetradecamers were still detected in the ClpP1 sample, although similar ClpP1 concentrations were used in both assays. (D) Cross-linking experiments. In the absence and presence of ADEP1, the addition of the cross-linker BS3 and the complex stabilizing agent sodium citrate led to the detection of ClpP1P2 heterotetradecamers via native PAGE and subsequent immunoblotting. Remarkably, larger amounts of ClpP1 homotetradecamers were only detected in the ClpP1 sample in the presence of ADEP1 and absence of ClpP2. (E) Increasing the amount of both ADEP and ClpP, while keeping their ratio constant, improved the detection of the tetradecameric protein band in the ClpP1P2 sample. (F) Size exclusion chromatography of ClpP1P2 and ClpP1 alone and in the presence of ADEP1. Here, tetradecamers were detected in the ADEP-ClpP1P2 sample, which eluted slightly earlier than the tetradecameric fraction in the ADEP-ClpP1 sample. Hence, despite the rather small difference in size of ~18 kDa, the size-exclusion data allow for the differentiation of ADEP-bound ClpP1P2 heterotetradecamers versus and ADEP-bound ClpP1 homotetradecamers. The calculated mass of both ClpP1P2 and ClpP1 complexes, processed (indicated by an asterisk) or unprocessed, are shown. The data are representative of three biological replicates. Analytical gel filtration was performed using the Superdex 200 Increase 3.2/300 column (GE Healthcare) in the absence of DTT. The protein markers thyroglobulin (669 kDa), apoferritin (443 kDa), β-amylase (200 kDa), alcohol dehydrogenase (150 kDa, yeast), BSA (66 kDa), and carbonic anhydrase (29 kDa, bovine) were employed for size estimation. (G) Using the cross-linker BS3, native PAGE showed decreased homotetradecamer formation of the ClpP1Y76S mutant compared to wild-type ClpP1 upon the addition of ADEP1. (H) Suc-LY-AMC (left) and FITC-casein (right) degradation assays employing the mutant proteins ClpP1Y76S and ClpP2S94Y. Our data indicate that Y76 of ClpP1 is important for the activation of ClpP1 by ADEP1, while S94 of ClpP2 is required for Clp-ATPase-ClpP2 interaction. In all assays, hydrolysis of Suc-LY-AMC and FITC-casein was recorded as an RFU increase over time. Mean values (normalized to %) of initial linear reaction kinetics are shown. Statistical analyses were performed with one-way ANOVA using three biological replicates each comprising three technical replicates. ns, P > 0.05; *, P ≤ 0.05; **, P ≤ 0.01; ***, P ≤ 0.001; ****, P ≤ 0.0001. Error bars indicate standard deviations. Download FIG S2, PDF file, 0.7 MB. Next, we analyzed the oligomeric states of ClpP1 and ClpP2 in the absence and presence of ADEP1 by size exclusion chromatography (Fig. 3H). Regarding ClpP1, it emerged that the addition of ADEP1 clearly led to a distinct shift of the peak representing a ClpP1 tetradecamer (calculated molecular mass of 305.2 kDa), potentially shifting an existing compressed form of the ClpP1 tetradecamer to its active, extended form. In contrast, the elution profile of ClpP2 did not change in the presence of ADEP1, and ClpP2 mainly eluted as heptamers (calculated molecular mass of 182.2 kDa) or lower oligomeric species, while ClpP2 tetradecamers (calculated molecular mass of 364.4 kDa) were not detected (Fig. 3H). Hence, our data show that ADEP1 binds to ClpP1 and triggers its oligomerization into catalytically active ClpP1 tetradecamers. This explains the independent peptidase and protease activity of ClpP1 in the presence of ADEP1, while ClpP2 does not appear to interact with ADEP1 under the conditions tested. In line with this, it is noteworthy that the ClpP1 and ClpP2 proteins underwent processing reactions in the course of our in vitro degradation experiments (Fig. S3 and S4). In vitro, processing of ClpP1 relied either on the binding of ClpXP2 or on the binding of ADEP (regardless of ClpP2), while processing of ClpP2 strictly depended on the presence of ClpP1 but not on ClpX or ADEP (Fig. S3A and B). However, the processing of both ClpP1 and ClpP2 fully relied on the integrity of the catalytic triad of ClpP1 (Fig. S3C) and did not alter the requirement of heterotetradecameric complexes for proteolytic activity (Fig. S4F), thereby corroborating our hitherto obtained results. ClpP1 and ClpP2 undergo processing reactions upon interaction with ADEP or Clp-ATPases. (A) ClpP1 and ClpP2 are processed when used in combination and in the presence of ClpX. Processed proteins are marked by colored asterisks (ClpP1*, blue; ClpP2*, green). Processing of ClpP1 depends on activation by Clp-ATPase binding to ClpP2 and is prevented in the hydrophobic patch mutant ClpP2hp. In contrast, ClpP2 processing solely depends on heterotetradecamer formation, but not on binding and activation by a Clp-ATPase. (B) ADEP1 induces processing of ClpP1 and accelerates processing of ClpP2. Samples were incubated in the absence or presence of ADEP1 over time. Processing of ClpP1 requires the presence of an activator (here ADEP1). The processing of ClpP1 occurred in samples with mixed ClpP1P2 and more slowly by ClpP1 alone as indicated by blue asterisks. Thus, ADEP, in contrast to a Clp-ATPase, can stimulate ClpP1 processing in the absence of ClpP2. Unlike ClpP1, processing of ClpP2 solely depends on heterotetradecamer formation but not on binding and activation by ADEP1. However, processing of ClpP2 is notably accelerated in the presence of ADEP1. (C) Processing of ClpP1 and ClpP2 depends on the catalytic function of ClpP1. Processing of both ClpP1 and ClpP2 was prevented in samples containing the catalytic triad mutant ClpP1S113A, whereas ClpP2S131A did not affect the processing reactions. All assays were performed at least in triplicates. DMSO was used in control reactions. Processed forms of ClpP1 and ClpP2 are indicated by colored asterisks (ClpP1*, blue; ClpP2*, green). Representative SDS-PAGE images are shown. (D) Overview of processing reactions. Download FIG S3, PDF file, 0.6 MB. Intact protein mass spectrometry and proteolytic activity of processed variants of ClpP1 and ClpP2. (A to D) Intact protein mass spectrometry of ClpP1 alone (A), ClpP2 alone (B), ClpP1 + ClpP2 + DMSO (C), and ClpP1 + ClpP2 + ADEP1 (D) verified that ClpP2 is processed by ClpP1 in the absence and presence of ADEP1 (indicated by P2*), whereas ClpP1 processes itself only in the presence of ADEP1 (indicated by P1*). Our data show that ClpP2 is processed with one intermediate processing step (P2intermediate*), finally resulting in mature ClpP2 (P2*). (E) Amino acid sequences of ClpP1 and ClpP2 indicating the processing sites according to intact protein mass spectrometry. ClpP2 is first processed between amino acids D11 and R12, resulting in an intermediately processed ClpP2 (P2intermediate*) that starts with the amino acids RMHAVQ. The second processing site of ClpP2 is located between amino acids S33 and R34, resulting in mature ClpP2 (P2*) starting with the amino acid sequence RYIIPR. The detected mass for processed ClpP1 (P1*) indicates the processing site to be located between the amino acids G24 and P25. P1* was only detected in the presence of ADEP1. (F) To investigate the effect of processing on the proteolytic activity, we cloned and purified the processed variants ClpP1* and ClpP2* and used them in FITC-casein degradation assays in the absence or presence of ClpC1. As observed before, when unprocessed ClpP1 and ClpP2 were subjected to the same assay, proteolytic digestion of FITC-casein only occurred in the presence of both ClpP isoforms, (here ClpP1* and ClpP2*) plus ClpC1, proving that the processed forms still rely on heterotetradecamer formation and the presence of a Clp-ATPase for proteolytic activity (for processing induced by ADEP compare Fig. S3). Hydrolysis of FITC-casein was monitored by an increase in the fluorescence signal (RFU) over time. Mean values (normalized in %) of the initial linear reaction kinetics are given. P values were calculated with one-way ANOVA using three biological replicates each comprising three technical replicates. ns, P > 0.05; ****, P ≤ 0.0001. Error bars indicate standard deviations. Download FIG S4, PDF file, 2.5 MB. Differences in the binding pocket of ClpP1 versus ClpP2 modulate specificity to ADEP and ClpC1. Since ADEP and Clp-ATPases usually bind to the same hydrophobic pockets of the ClpP barrel, it is intriguing that ClpP1 emerged ADEP-sensitive but did not interact with Clp-ATPases, whereas ClpP2 was ADEP insensitive while constituting the main interaction partner for ClpX, ClpC1, and ClpC2. When analyzing the hydrophobic pockets of ClpP1 and ClpP2, it became apparent that both isoforms differ in the first amino acid residue that was selected for mutation of each ClpP hydrophobic pocket (Y76 in ClpP1 and S94 in ClpP2, see above). Since tyrosine and serine obviously differ regarding their size and physicochemical properties, we hypothesized that this difference may influence the binding capability of ClpP1 versus ClpP2 for ADEP and corresponding Clp-ATPases. We therefore exchanged Y76 of ClpP1 by a serine and, vice versa, S94 of ClpP2 by a tyrosine, thereby yielding the hydrophobic pocket mutant proteins ClpP1Y76S and ClpP2S94Y. Native PAGE showed that ClpP1Y76S was notably impaired in ADEP-induced assembly of homotetradecamers (Fig. S2G), and consequently, in the presence of ADEP, ClpP1Y76S-containing complexes showed substantially decreased peptidase activity compared to wtClpP1 (Fig. S2H), together indicating that the binding of ADEP to ClpP1Y76S was impaired. Of note, ClpC1-mediated protease activity of ClpP1Y76SP2 was also reduced, suggesting that Y76 may also have a role in Clp protease assembly and/or catalysis. Now, probing ClpP2S94Y, protease activity of ClpC1P1P2S94Y was significantly reduced, suggesting impaired interaction of ClpC1 with ClpP2S94Y. However, the ClpP2S94Y mutation did not suffice to make ClpP2 responsive to ADEP (peptidase activity could not be activated by ADEP). Thus, our results clearly indicate that Y76 in ClpP1 and S94 in ClpP2 play crucial roles in conferring the specificity to ADEP versus ClpC1, respectively. However, switching Y76 in ClpP1 and S94 in ClpP2 was not sufficient to switch the individual binding specificities regarding ADEP and ClpC1 entirely, which may be due to the individual protein characteristics of both ClpP1 and ClpP2, e.g., intramolecular bonds, folding characteristics, cavity spacing, and/or further potentially contributing amino acids. Cell-based studies corroborate the existence of a heteromeric, asymmetric Clp protease complex in Streptomyces. Our study so far employed purified S. hawaiiensis proteins in vitro to elucidate the molecular composition and function of the Streptomyces Clp protease. To verify our findings on the level of the Streptomyces cell and to also transfer these findings to other Streptomyces strains, we chose S. lividans as a model strain for confirmative experiments, since earlier studies on the Clp system in streptomycetes were focused on this organism (21–23, 26, 36). In this context, it is noteworthy, that ClpP1 and ClpP2 of S. hawaiiensis, S. lividans, and S. coelicolor appear closely related and share high sequence similarity (Fig. S1D). To this end, we constructed in-frame ΔclpP1 (ΔSlP1) as well as ΔclpP1clpP2 (ΔSlP1P2) deletion mutants in S. lividans, which we complemented with either SlclpP1 or SlclpP1P2, respectively. In addition, C terminally His6-tagged SlClpP2 (SlClpP2-His6) was constructed for detection purposes. Cell extracts of the respective deletion and complemented mutants were then analyzed via immunoblotting for the SlPopR-dependent expression of SlClpP3 by utilizing anti-ClpP1, anti-ClpP3, and anti-His6 antibodies. Here, we regarded the absence of SlClpP3 as a reporter for the functional state of the SlClpP1P2 system, based on previous studies in S. lividans (22), which have shown that the degradation of SlPopR by SlClpP1P2-mediated regulatory proteolysis prevents the expression of SlClpP3. In short, whenever SlClpP3 is present, SlClpP1P2 is not capable of degrading SlPopR (Fig. 4A). In line with our in vitro results described above, in vivo SlClpP1P2 protease activity (and the corresponding absence of SlClpP3) could only be observed, when both SlClpP1 and SlClpP2 were present in the cell (Fig. 4B and Fig. S5A), thus underlining the requirement of a functional interaction of ClpP1 and ClpP2. FIG 4Cell-based studies verify the presence of a heteromeric ClpP1P2 complex, Clp-ATPase binding via ClpP2 as well as ADEP binding via ClpP1. (A) Schematic overview of the effect of Clp protease functionalities on ClpP3 expression. (B) Immunoblotting of cell lysates from wild-type and mutant S. lividans cells (as indicated) using anti-ClpP3 antibodies. By reconstituting wild-type, catalytic triad mutants, or hydrophobic pocket mutants of SlClpP1 or SlClpP2, our results using Streptomyces cells underline the requirement for both SlClpP1 and SlClpP2 to build a functional, heteromeric Clp protease system, which strictly depends on a functional catalytic triad of SlClpP1 for proteolytic activity and on a functional hydrophobic pocket of SlClpP2 for the interaction with corresponding Clp-ATPases (both indicated by the loss of PopR degradation and concomitant expression of SlClpP3 in mutants harboring either ClpP1S113A or ClpP2hp, respectively). All assays were performed at least in triplicates. Representative Western Blot images are shown. (C) Disk diffusion bioassay using ADEP1 verifies ADEP binding via ClpP1 in S. lividans, since only the loss of a functional copy of SlClpP1, but not of SlClpP2, confers ADEP resistance. Bioassays were performed at least in triplicates. Representative images are shown. Cell-based studies verify the presence of a heteromeric ClpP1P2 complex, Clp-ATPase binding via ClpP2 as well as ADEP binding via ClpP1. (A) Schematic overview of the effect of Clp protease functionalities on ClpP3 expression. (B) Immunoblotting of cell lysates from wild-type and mutant S. lividans cells (as indicated) using anti-ClpP3 antibodies. By reconstituting wild-type, catalytic triad mutants, or hydrophobic pocket mutants of SlClpP1 or SlClpP2, our results using Streptomyces cells underline the requirement for both SlClpP1 and SlClpP2 to build a functional, heteromeric Clp protease system, which strictly depends on a functional catalytic triad of SlClpP1 for proteolytic activity and on a functional hydrophobic pocket of SlClpP2 for the interaction with corresponding Clp-ATPases (both indicated by the loss of PopR degradation and concomitant expression of SlClpP3 in mutants harboring either ClpP1S113A or ClpP2hp, respectively). All assays were performed at least in triplicates. Representative Western Blot images are shown. (C) Disk diffusion bioassay using ADEP1 verifies ADEP binding via ClpP1 in S. lividans, since only the loss of a functional copy of SlClpP1, but not of SlClpP2, confers ADEP resistance. Bioassays were performed at least in triplicates. Representative images are shown. Cell-based studies of Clp protease activity in wild-type and clpP1/clpP2 mutant cells of S. lividans. (A to C) Immunoblotting of cell lysates from wild-type S. lividans cells and clpP1/clpP2 deletion mutants (A), catalytic triad mutants (B), or hydrophobic pocket mutants (C), as well as respective complemented strains, using anti-ClpP1, anti-ClpP3, and anti-His6 antibodies. Both SlClpP1 and SlClpP2 are required to build a functional, heteromeric Clp protease system in Streptomyces cells, which strictly depends on a functional catalytic triad of SlClpP1 for proteolytic activity and on a functional hydrophobic pocket of SlClpP2 for the interaction with corresponding Clp-ATPases (both indicated by the loss of PopR degradation and concomitant expression of SlClpP3 in mutants harboring either ClpP1S113A or ClpP2hp, respectively). All assays were performed at least in triplicates. Representative Western Blot images are shown. Noteworthy, in the cell extract of the strain ΔSlP1P2 expressing the proteins SlClpP1S113A and SlClpP2-His, slight signals of processed forms of SlClpP2-His were detectable, which did not appear in the absence of SlClpP1S113A and were also not visible in our in vitro experiments. Thus, in the more complex and optimized environment of the Streptomyces cell, the interaction with SlClpP1S113A might permit a weak catalytic activity of SlClpP2, sufficient for self-processing under appropriate conditions. However, in none of our assays, neither in vivo nor in vitro, could we detect substrate degradation activity of the ClpP2 active sites within the Streptomyces ClpP1P2 complex. Interestingly, the hydrophobic pocket mutations did not affect the processing of ClpP1 and ClpP2, indicating that processing of ClpP1 does not strictly rely on Clp-ATPase binding to ClpP2 in the living cell, representing a situation with additional, potentially necessary interacting factors present, in contrast to the in vitro situation that is limited to a defined set of proteins. Download FIG S5, PDF file, 0.3 MB. We then explored ClpP catalytic triad mutant proteins in S. lividans by complementing the ΔSlP1P2 mutant with different combinations of the wild-type and serine-to-alanine mutant genes SlclpP1S113A, SlclpP2S132A, and SlclpP2S132A-His (Fig. 4B and Fig. S5B). Here, immunoblotting experiments showed that a SlClpP1P2 system capable of SlPopR degradation depends on a functional catalytic triad in SlClpP1, but not in SlClpP2, thus supporting our in vitro results and providing first in vivo evidence that the catalytic function of ClpP1 accounts for the proteolytic activity of the heteromeric ClpP1P2 complex in Streptomyces. We next investigated the binding of Clp-ATPases to the SlClpP1P2 complex in S. lividans cells by complementing the ΔSlP1P2 mutant with different combinations of the wild-type and hydrophobic pocket mutant proteins SlClpP1hp, SlClpP2hp, and SlClpP2hp-His (Fig. 4B and Fig. S5C). The degradation of SlPopR, and thus the presence of a SlClpP1P2 system capable of hydrolyzing protein substrates, depended on a functional hydrophobic pocket in SlClpP2 but not in SlClpP1, therefore corroborating our in vitro results that Clp-ATPase binding occurs via ClpP2, but not via ClpP1. Regarding the binding of ADEP to the SlClpP1P2 complex, we conducted disk diffusion bioassays to determine the effect of the respective deletions and complementations on ADEP sensitivity (Fig. 4C). Here, ADEP sensitivity entirely relied on the presence of a functional SlClpP1 protein but not on SlClpP2, thus verifying the exclusive binding of ADEP to ClpP1 and indicating that a functional ClpP1 protein is sufficient to unleash the antimicrobial activity of ADEP in Streptomyces. ADEP antibiotics accelerate the Clp-ATPase-dependent hydrolysis of protein substrates by the Streptomyces Clp protease. Our data provides in vitro and cell-based evidence that Streptomyces ClpP1 and ClpP2 form a heterotetradecameric complex that can be activated for proteolytic activity either by a cognate Clp-ATPase via ClpP2 or by the small molecule antibiotic ADEP1 via ClpP1. Previous studies on Clp proteases from other bacteria, such as B. subtilis, S. aureus, E. coli, M. tuberculosis, and Chlamydia trachomatis, demonstrated that the addition of ADEP to a reaction mixture of ClpP and a Clp-ATPase abrogated the interaction between the Clp-ATPase and the ClpP core in all cases and consequently prevented Clp-ATPase-dependent substrate hydrolysis without exception (19, 37–40). This steric competition led to the inhibition of the natural functions of the Clp protease in these bacteria. Intrigued by our observation that the Streptomyces Clp-ATPases and ADEP interact with separate ClpPs, we wanted to know if the situation might be different in this genus. First, we compared in vitro protein degradation of the native substrates ClgR and PopR by ClpXP1P2 in the absence or presence of ADEP1. While ClgR and PopR were digested by ClpXP1P2 in the absence of ADEP (Fig. 1B and 2D), the addition of ADEP did not prevent the degradation of both substrates but, on the contrary, even led to a weak but notable increase of substrate digestion over time (Fig. 5A and E). In addition, the ClpC1P1P2-mediated degradation of PopR was markedly stimulated by ADEP (Fig. S6A). Of note, natural substrate degradation did not occur in the absence of a Clp-ATPase or with the hydrophobic pocket mutant protein ClpP2hp (Fig. 5A and E), indicating that the interaction with a Clp-ATPase remains a prerequisite for the digestion of natural Clp substrates and excluding Clp-ATPase-independent digestion of both substrates via ADEP-activated ClpP1P2. FIG 5ADEP1 accelerates the proteolytic activity of the Streptomyces Clp protease. (A) ADEP accelerates the degradation of the natural Clp substrates ClgR and PopR by ClpXP1P2 in in vitro protein degradation assays. Functional ClpX and its interaction with ClpP2 are prerequisites for ClgR and PopR degradation, even in the presence of ADEP. (B) ADEP increases the hydrolysis of GFP-ssrA by ClpXP1P2. GFP-ssrA degradation was measured via fluorescence decrease over time. Background indicates default GFP fluorescence in the buffer solution without enzymes. Data shown are exemplary for at least three biological replicates. (C) ADEP activates the free ClpP1P2 core to degrade FITC-casein and in addition stimulates the ClpC1-mediated FITC-casein degradation. Protease activity assays using FITC-casein as a substrate show that ADEP1 induces FITC-casein degradation by both ClpP1P2 as well as by ClpC1P1P2. Hydrolysis of FITC-casein was monitored as RFU increased over time. Mean values (normalized in %) of initial linear reaction kinetics are shown. P values were calculated with one-way ANOVA from three biological replicates each comprising three technical replicates. ns, P > 0.05; ****, P ≤ 0.0001. Error bars indicate standard deviations. (D) ADEP activates the free ClpP1P2 core to degrade β-casein and in addition stimulates the ClpC2-mediated β-casein degradation. ClpC2-mediated β-casein degradation is prevented in the hydrophobic pocket mutant protein ClpP2hp. However, ADEP1 can still activate the ClpP1P2hp proteolytic core by binding to ClpP1. Hydrolysis of β-casein is only completely prevented when both hydrophobic pocket mutants, ClpP1hp and ClpP2hp, are used in combination. Hydrolysis of β-casein is fastest when wild-type ClpP1P2 interacts with both activators, i.e., ClpC2 plus ADEP, in parallel. Of note, in ADEP-containing reaction mixtures, ClpC2P1P2 degrades β-casein first followed by digestion of ClpC2. All assays were performed at least in triplicates. In SDS-PAGE images, representative experiments are shown. DMSO was used in all control reactions. (E) Densitometry of SDS-PAGE proteins bands of ClgR and PopR (Fig. 5A) and β-casein (Fig. 5D) of each time point relative to the samples collected at t0. The relative band quantity was measured from three replicate SDS-PAGE analyses. Mean values are shown and error bars indicate corresponding standard deviations. Of note, a slight decrease of the β-casein band in the negative-control ClpP1hpP2hp and ClpP1P2hp could be detected, which might be due to independent unfolding activity of the only partially folded β-casein by ClpC2. ADEP1 accelerates the proteolytic activity of the Streptomyces Clp protease. (A) ADEP accelerates the degradation of the natural Clp substrates ClgR and PopR by ClpXP1P2 in in vitro protein degradation assays. Functional ClpX and its interaction with ClpP2 are prerequisites for ClgR and PopR degradation, even in the presence of ADEP. (B) ADEP increases the hydrolysis of GFP-ssrA by ClpXP1P2. GFP-ssrA degradation was measured via fluorescence decrease over time. Background indicates default GFP fluorescence in the buffer solution without enzymes. Data shown are exemplary for at least three biological replicates. (C) ADEP activates the free ClpP1P2 core to degrade FITC-casein and in addition stimulates the ClpC1-mediated FITC-casein degradation. Protease activity assays using FITC-casein as a substrate show that ADEP1 induces FITC-casein degradation by both ClpP1P2 as well as by ClpC1P1P2. Hydrolysis of FITC-casein was monitored as RFU increased over time. Mean values (normalized in %) of initial linear reaction kinetics are shown. P values were calculated with one-way ANOVA from three biological replicates each comprising three technical replicates. ns, P > 0.05; ****, P ≤ 0.0001. Error bars indicate standard deviations. (D) ADEP activates the free ClpP1P2 core to degrade β-casein and in addition stimulates the ClpC2-mediated β-casein degradation. ClpC2-mediated β-casein degradation is prevented in the hydrophobic pocket mutant protein ClpP2hp. However, ADEP1 can still activate the ClpP1P2hp proteolytic core by binding to ClpP1. Hydrolysis of β-casein is only completely prevented when both hydrophobic pocket mutants, ClpP1hp and ClpP2hp, are used in combination. Hydrolysis of β-casein is fastest when wild-type ClpP1P2 interacts with both activators, i.e., ClpC2 plus ADEP, in parallel. Of note, in ADEP-containing reaction mixtures, ClpC2P1P2 degrades β-casein first followed by digestion of ClpC2. All assays were performed at least in triplicates. In SDS-PAGE images, representative experiments are shown. DMSO was used in all control reactions. (E) Densitometry of SDS-PAGE proteins bands of ClgR and PopR (Fig. 5A) and β-casein (Fig. 5D) of each time point relative to the samples collected at t0. The relative band quantity was measured from three replicate SDS-PAGE analyses. Mean values are shown and error bars indicate corresponding standard deviations. Of note, a slight decrease of the β-casein band in the negative-control ClpP1hpP2hp and ClpP1P2hp could be detected, which might be due to independent unfolding activity of the only partially folded β-casein by ClpC2. ClpC1 protease activity and ATP consumption in the presence of ADEP1. (A) ClpC1 is self-digested by ClpC1P1P2 after prolonged incubation. In vitro protein degradation assays employing purified Clp proteins as indicated and PopR as a substrate. The data show that the digestion of PopR by ClpC1P1P2 is accelerated by ADEP1 compared to the DMSO control. Of note, in the presence of ADEP1 and after PopR has been fully digested, ClpC1 is also slowly degraded in ClpC1P1P2 reactions. All assays were performed in triplicates and representative SDS-PAGE images are shown. DMSO was used in control reactions. (B) ClpC1-mediated ATPase activity in casein degradation assays. To answer the question of whether the observed increase of Clp-ATPase/ClpP1P2 activity in the presence of ADEP1 was due to more rapid utilization of ATP by the AAA+ ATPases, we directly measured the turnover of ATP to ADP by ClpC1 in casein degradation assays. Here, ATP turnover was not increased in the presence of ADEP (compared to the DMSO control), neither for ClpCP1P2 nor ClpC1 alone. Hence, stimulated ATPase/ClpP1P2 activity in the presence of ADEP1 is most probably unrelated to ATP turnover. Instead, ADEP1 binding may affect the overall structural network of the ClpP1P2 complex, including stabilization in the extended conformation and the adjustment of the active site residues as well as pore opening, as was previously described for ADEP-activated ClpP in other bacteria (34, 35, 38). Mean values of three biological replicates are shown. Statistics were performed with one-way ANOVA. ns, P > 0.05; ****, P ≤ 0.0001. Error bars indicate standard deviations. Download FIG S6, PDF file, 0.9 MB. To further study the unprecedented acceleration of the Clp-ATPase-dependent substrate hydrolysis by ADEP, we tested the effect of ADEP1 on the degradation of the protein model substrate GFP-ssrA by ClpXP1P2. The ssrA-tag is a common degron that is recognized by Clp-ATPases and results in the subsequent degradation of the fusion protein by the Clp protease (41). The kinetics of GFP-ssrA hydrolysis can be conveniently followed by measuring a decrease in fluorescence (42). In line with our previous results, ADEP1 clearly stimulated GFP-ssrA degradation by ClpXP1P2 (Fig. 5B). Neither ClpP1P2 alone nor ClpX alone, in the absence or presence of ADEP1, could degrade the substrate, demonstrating the strict necessity of a fully assembled Clp protease complex for GFP-ssrA hydrolysis. In our control sample with ClpXP1S113AClpP2S131A, we did not detect a decline in relative fluorescence units (RFU), indicating that the drop in RFU, measured for ClpXP1P2, is due to unfolding and cleavage of the substrate. Similarly, ADEP1 notably induced the degradation of FITC-casein by ClpC1P1P2 (Fig. 5C) and β-casein by ClpC2P1P2 (Fig. 5D). Drawing this conclusion from experiments with casein, which can serve as a substrate for ADEP-activated as well as Clp-ATPase-activated ClpP1P2, is possible by comparing the degradation rates of the individual complexes. Degradation efficacy was the highest when both activators were present at the same time (forming ADEP-ClpP1P2-Clp-ATPase complexes) and significantly lower (P ≤ 0.0001) for ClpP1P2-Clp-ATPase, ADEP-ClpP1P2, and ADEP-ClpP1 (activity decreasing in that order; Fig. 3G and Fig. 5C to E). The fact that ADEP addition to the ClpP1P2-Clp-ATPase complex further stimulated casein proteolysis speaks against the significant formation of the less active ADEP-only complexes. Further noteworthy, the stimulated Clp-ATPase/ClpP1P2 activity in the presence of ADEP was not due to an increased ATP turnover, since the conversion of ATP to ADP was unchanged in ClpC1-mediated casein degradation assays in the absence and presence of ADEP (Fig. S6B). In summary, our data clearly show that ADEP1 accelerates the Clp-ATPase-driven degradation of protein substrates by the Streptomyces housekeeping Clp protease. Further noteworthy, under these conditions and after β-casein had been fully digested, ClpC2 was slowly degraded as well (Fig. 5D). Similarly, after complete degradation of PopR had occurred and during prolonged incubation, ClpC1 was also degraded in the presence of ADEP1 (Fig. S6A), suggesting ClpC1 and ClpC2 as putative targets of the ADEP-deregulated ClpP protease in Streptomyces.