Results PSM-Specific Transport through PmtCD and AbcA. We began comparing PSM secretion between PmtCD and AbcA by applying our cell-based secretion assay in which we detect PSMs present in culture supernatants using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with an inline mass spectrometer (HPLC-MS). We engineered a methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) USA300 strain LAC devoid of PSMs and in which we deleted the abcA and pmtABCD genes (Δpsmαβhld, ΔpmtABCD, ΔabcA). We transformed this strain with two plasmids: one encoding all five S. aureus α-type PSMs under a xylose-inducible promoter and the other encoding either pmtCD or abcA (Fig. 1A). We then validated that our HPLC-MS detection assay is quantitative. We first revealed a large linear dynamic range dependent on PSM concentration using synthetic PSMs to generate standard curves (Fig. 1B), and then we confirmed that detection of each PSM is identical when spiked into culture filtrates derived from cells expressing pmtCD or abcA (Fig. 1C and SI Appendix, Fig. S1). Finally, because PSMs are toxic to cells lacking the pmtABCD operon (17), we restricted PSM induction to 1 h, which did not noticeably impact cell viability (Fig. 1D). Taken together, we developed a quantitative assay that enabled us to accurately measure PSM secretion by cells through each transporter. Fig. 1.Cell-based PSM secretion assay validation. (A) Assay schematic using MRSA LAC Δpsmαβhld, ΔpmtABCD, and ΔabcA transformed with plasmids encoding ABC transporters and α-type PSMs under control of inducible PxylA promoter. (B) Standard curves of HPLC-MS detection generated with known amounts of synthetic PSM peptides. (C) Indistinguishable (ANOVA P value = 0.28 between pmtCD and abcA groups) detection of synthetic PSMs spiked (50 nM each PSM) into culture supernatants (extracellular fraction) from cells encoding either pmtCD or abcA, demonstrating no differences in PSM elution or sample ionization during HPLC-MS analysis due to distinct sampling environments (i.e., the culture supernatants). (D) Viable cell counts after 1 h of xylose induction demonstrating minimal impact on cell viability (n = 3 per group, mean ± SEM, ANOVA used for significance testing across groups). Cell-based PSM secretion assay validation. (A) Assay schematic using MRSA LAC Δpsmαβhld, ΔpmtABCD, and ΔabcA transformed with plasmids encoding ABC transporters and α-type PSMs under control of inducible PxylA promoter. (B) Standard curves of HPLC-MS detection generated with known amounts of synthetic PSM peptides. (C) Indistinguishable (ANOVA P value = 0.28 between pmtCD and abcA groups) detection of synthetic PSMs spiked (50 nM each PSM) into culture supernatants (extracellular fraction) from cells encoding either pmtCD or abcA, demonstrating no differences in PSM elution or sample ionization during HPLC-MS analysis due to distinct sampling environments (i.e., the culture supernatants). (D) Viable cell counts after 1 h of xylose induction demonstrating minimal impact on cell viability (n = 3 per group, mean ± SEM, ANOVA used for significance testing across groups). In cells that expressed all five α-type PSMs, PmtCD and AbcA differentially transported the individual PSMs: PSMα4 was exported primarily by PmtCD; PSMα1 was exported at similar levels by PmtCD and AbcA; and PSMα2, PSMα3, and δ-toxin were preferentially exported by AbcA. Thus, our data demonstrate substrate-specific export through each PSM transporter (Fig. 2A). Fig. 2.Hydrophobicity is a determinant of PSM secretion specificity through S. aureus ABC transporters. (A) PSM secretion after a 1 h of co-induction with all α-type PSMs by cells encoding pmtCD or abcA. (B) PSM secretion after a 1 h induction of individual α-type PSMs by cells encoding pmtCD or abcA (n = 9 per group). (C) Logistic regression showing a significant (P = 0.002) relationship between PSM hydrophobicity and secretion of PSMs by cells encoding pmtCD vs. abcA from data in A. (D) Model of PSM secretion through PmtCD and AbcA. PSMs in the cytoplasm can be exported by AbcA or can partition into the inner leaflet of the cell membrane and be exported by PmtCD. Partitioning of PSMs into the membrane is dependent on hydrophobicity (GRAVY score) and is presumed to be rate-limiting, resulting in the export by PmtCD appearing slower than by AbcA. The hydrophilic and hydrophobic faces of the PSM peptide are colored blue and black, respectively. (n = 9 total of n = 3 per three independent experiments, mean ± SEM nested within independent experiments). Hydrophobicity is a determinant of PSM secretion specificity through S. aureus ABC transporters. (A) PSM secretion after a 1 h of co-induction with all α-type PSMs by cells encoding pmtCD or abcA. (B) PSM secretion after a 1 h induction of individual α-type PSMs by cells encoding pmtCD or abcA (n = 9 per group). (C) Logistic regression showing a significant (P = 0.002) relationship between PSM hydrophobicity and secretion of PSMs by cells encoding pmtCD vs. abcA from data in A. (D) Model of PSM secretion through PmtCD and AbcA. PSMs in the cytoplasm can be exported by AbcA or can partition into the inner leaflet of the cell membrane and be exported by PmtCD. Partitioning of PSMs into the membrane is dependent on hydrophobicity (GRAVY score) and is presumed to be rate-limiting, resulting in the export by PmtCD appearing slower than by AbcA. The hydrophilic and hydrophobic faces of the PSM peptide are colored blue and black, respectively. (n = 9 total of n = 3 per three independent experiments, mean ± SEM nested within independent experiments). Hydrophobicity is a Determinant of Export Specificity. Surprisingly however, in cells that expressed each PSM individually, AbcA exported each more efficiently than PmtCD (Fig. 2B). Importantly, that PmtCD and AbcA can export all PSMs regardless of sequence suggests that a determinant other than sequence-specific interactions between individual PSMs with PmtCD or AbcA exists and is needed to explain the specificity we observed when PSMs were expressed as a cohort. We noted that in the latter case, PmtCD and AbcA, respectively, dominated in export of the most (PSMα4) and least (δ-toxin) hydrophobic PSMs as measured by the grand average of hydropathy score (GRAVY), which captures the average residue hydrophobicity over a peptide sequence. To quantitatively compare secretion of each PSM through PmtCD versus AbcA, we calculated a transport preference metric (Materials and Methods) based on the relative amount that each PSM is exported through either PmtCD or AbcA. This enabled us to use logistic regression to statistically test the contribution of hydrophobicity to the transport preference of each PSM. Indeed, we found that the GRAVY score explained 58% (marginal R2) of the transport preference (P = 0.0007, Fig. 2C), demonstrating that hydrophobicity is strongly associated with substrate specificity. Interestingly, the hydrophobic moment, the other primary biophysical parameter of amphipathic helices, was not associated with transport preference (P = 0.62). This is likely due to the narrow range of hydrophobic moments exhibited by S. aureus α-type PSMs (0.404 to 0.599). While increased hydrophobic interactions between PSMs and PmtCD as compared with AbcA could in part explain why hydrophobicity drives export through PmtCD, we became intrigued by the possibility of an additional mechanism. As amphipathic peptides, PSMs spontaneously partition between aqueous and membranous phases, with hydrophobicity primarily governing the extent of membrane partitioning (20). ABC exporters have evolved to take up substrates from either aqueous or membranous milieus (21, 22). Thus, we hypothesized that PmtCD and AbcA have evolved to cooperatively export PSMs from the membrane and cytoplasm, respectively (Fig. 2D). We took advantage of the fact that although PSMs are highly conserved within staphylococcal species, PSMs are diverse across the genus, both in number and sequence (SI Appendix, Fig. S2) (8, 9, 23). In contrast, all PSMs known to-date harbor pronounced amphiphilicity and therefore partitioning between lipidic and aqueous environments. Thus, PSM amphiphilicity and not peptide sequence would have constrained the evolution of PSM transporter orthologs across the Staphylococcus genus. This offered a direct test of our model: we predicted PmtCD and AbcA transporter orthologs would not only be capable of exporting S. aureus α-type PSMs but would retain hydrophobicity as a specificity determinant. We cloned pmtCD and abcA orthologs from Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylcoccus haemolyticus, two species with characterized α-type PSMs that are dissimilar to S. aureus PSMs, and tested them in our secretion assay using our engineered S. aureus LAC strain expressing S. aureus PSMs. Indeed, all transporters promoted PSM secretion (Fig. 3 A and B), and for each transporter pair tested, we found a significant positive relationship between PSM hydrophobicity and export through PmtCD relative to AbcA (Fig. 3 C and D). Fig. 3.Hydrophobicity partially explains PSM export specificity. (A and B) S. aureus PSM secretion in S. aureus LAC Δpsmαβhld Δpmt ΔabcA cells encoding orthologous transporters from S. epidermidis (A) and S. haemolyticus (B). (C and D) Logistic regression showing a significant relationship between PSM hydrophobicity and PSM secretion by cells encoding pmtCD vs. abcA orthologs from data in A and B (C, n = 9 or D, n = 6 for three and two independent experiments for S. epidermidis and S. haemolyticus, respectively; mean ± SEM nested within independent experiments). Hydrophobicity partially explains PSM export specificity. (A and B) S. aureus PSM secretion in S. aureus LAC Δpsmαβhld Δpmt ΔabcA cells encoding orthologous transporters from S. epidermidis (A) and S. haemolyticus (B). (C and D) Logistic regression showing a significant relationship between PSM hydrophobicity and PSM secretion by cells encoding pmtCD vs. abcA orthologs from data in A and B (C, n = 9 or D, n = 6 for three and two independent experiments for S. epidermidis and S. haemolyticus, respectively; mean ± SEM nested within independent experiments). Immunity and Viability Roles of PmtCD Involve Membrane Interactions. We previously reported that chromosomal deletion of the entire pmtABCD operon, which additionally encodes for the distinct PmtAB transporter that has no role in α-type PSM secretion (19), is lethal in a wild-type background due to accumulation of α-type PSMs in the cellular membrane that led to membrane defects (17). However, pmtABCD deletion mutants were readily obtained in a PSM null background. Given our data that PmtCD primarily exports PSMα4—the most hydrophobic PSM—we tested whether deletion of only psmα4 is sufficient to permit deletion of the pmtABCD operon. Indeed, we succeeded in generating a LAC Δpsmα4 ΔpmtABCD mutant (Fig. 4 A and B). Moreover, we also detected δ-toxin secretion in this mutant (SI Appendix, Fig. S3), consistent with our secretion data showing that AbcA primarily transports δ-toxin. Fig. 4.Membrane perturbations independently implicate PmtCD in peptide export from the cell membrane. (A and B) PCR product size verification of serial chromosomal deletions of psmα4 (A) and the pmtABCD operon (B) red arrows indicate locations of primer binding for PCR verification. (C) Cell viability of LAC Δpsmαβhld ΔpmtABCD ΔabcA encoding either the pmtABCD operon or the abcA gene on the pRB473 plasmid. K41M, K39M, and K374M are ATPase catalytic mutations that abolish transport. (D) Cell viability of LAC Δpsmαβhld Δpmt cells encoding either the pmtABCD operon or the single transporters, pmtAB or pmtCD (n = 5 per group, mean ± SEM, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 by Tukey’s Honest Significant Difference test in comparison with positive control). Membrane perturbations independently implicate PmtCD in peptide export from the cell membrane. (A and B) PCR product size verification of serial chromosomal deletions of psmα4 (A) and the pmtABCD operon (B) red arrows indicate locations of primer binding for PCR verification. (C) Cell viability of LAC Δpsmαβhld ΔpmtABCD ΔabcA encoding either the pmtABCD operon or the abcA gene on the pRB473 plasmid. K41M, K39M, and K374M are ATPase catalytic mutations that abolish transport. (D) Cell viability of LAC Δpsmαβhld Δpmt cells encoding either the pmtABCD operon or the single transporters, pmtAB or pmtCD (n = 5 per group, mean ± SEM, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 by Tukey’s Honest Significant Difference test in comparison with positive control). Our recent discovery that the pmtABCD operon confers resistance to mammalian antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), such as the cationic amphipathic peptide LL-37 (24), substantiates membranous PSM export by PmtCD. By repeating the in vitro assay, we again observed that the pmtABCD operon conferred resistance to treatment with LL-37. In contrast, abcA had no such effect (Fig. 4C). To determine which Pmt transporter is responsible for protection against LL-37, we tested each transporter individually. Similar to α-type PSM export, we found that pmtCD is responsible for protection against LL-37 with no detectable contribution from pmtAB (Fig. 4D). Taken together, our data demonstrate that PmtCD, but not AbcA confer protection against self-produced PSMs and exogenous AMPs. Because the cytotoxicity of both is primarily caused by membrane perturbation, these results further support our model of PSM export by PmtCD through the membrane environment.