2. Results 2.1. Morphology, Classification, and Phylogenetic Analysis of Strain 891 The opaque colonies of strain 891 were spherical and wrinkled, and its curly or spiral mycelia cultivated for 14 days were differentiated into spore chains (Figure 2), suggesting this isolate had the common morphological characteristics of Streptomyces. BLAST analysis of the 16S rRNA gene sequence displayed that strain 891 had the highest similarity (98.93%) with the strain Streptomyces smyrnaeus DSM 42105. By hybridizing next-step generation (Illumina) and third-generation (PacBio) sequencing technologies, a high-quality chromosome-level genome of strain 891 together with a plasmid was assembled, and its sequence was deposited into GenBank and linked to BioProject PRJNA615006. Further, based on the 16S rRNA gene and whole genome sequences phylogenetic analysis, this strain made a monophyletic group with S. smyrnaeus DSM 42105, deposited in the NCBI database (Figure 3 and Figure 4) [18]. The average nucleotide identity (ANI) value for strains 891 and DSM 42105 was determined as 87.04%, indicating these strains belonged to species that were significantly different [19]. Accordingly, strain 891 was undoubtedly classified into the genus Streptomyces. 2.2. Genome Features of Strain 891 The whole genome of strain 891 consisted of one linear chromosome and a linear plasmid with 7,804,062 bp and 35,476 bp, respectively (Table 1). As many as 6871 protein-encoding genes were present in the chromosome and the longest genes had 78,261 bp. The GC content of the gene region was 71.44%, which was greater than that (68.87%) of the whole genome (Table S2). In strain 891, the total RNA pool included 18 rRNAs, 57 tRNAs, and 103 ncRNAs, in which the majority of these tRNAs were located in the chromosome’s intermediate region. It is normal that no rRNA, tRNA, or any non-coding RNA gene was present in the plasmid of strain 891. Essential genes associated with cell maintenance, including transcription, translation, and DNA replication, are usually sited in the “core” region of the chromosome of the Streptomyces genome [20,21]. The BLAST online alignment tool was used to identify regions of nucleotide similarity between the strain 891 complete plasmid sequence and the nr database maintained by NCBI database. The result showed no very similar plasmid sequence detected in other bacterial species or even genera. Fifteen predicted CRISPRs were present in strain 891, and two of them included more than 20 spacers located at the end of the linear chromosome (Table S3). The type I-B CRISPR-Cas immune system in strain 891 consists of seven CRISPR-associated (cas) genes flanked by two CRISPR loci (Table 2), which constitute its powerful immune system [22]. 2.3. Genome Sequence Annotation of Strain 891 To predict protein sequences, 6871 non-redundant genes were subjected to similarity analysis based on five public databases. According to the COG database, the number of unknown function genes was the highest, and up to 1994, accounted for 29.02% of total protein-encoding genes. That was followed by “Transcription”, “Carbohydrate transport and metabolism”, and “Amino acid transport and metabolism” as the most gene-rich classes in the COG groupings (Figure 5). GO analysis was used to categorize genes into three categories according to matches with known sequences. The largest functional groups in the biological process category were cellular nitrogen compound metabolic process. In the cellular component category, the largest functional groups were cell, and the largest functional groups in the molecular function category were ion binding. Of the eight classifications of KEGG pathways, metabolism (carbohydrate metabolism and amino acid) contained the highest number of genes, followed by brite hierarchies (protein families: signaling and cellular processes, genetic information processing, metabolism) (Figure 5). These findings suggest the presence of an enriched and varied array of carbohydrates and amino metabolism functions that enable higher energy conversion efficiency. 2.4. Additional Annotation on Prophage, Genomic Islands, Antibiotic Resistance, and Carbohydrate Genes Using the PHASTER (PHAge Search Tool Enhanced Release) approach, one complete prophage with a length of 45 kb and 50 genes and one truncated prophage with a size of 14 kb and 25 genes were found in the chromosome of strain 891 (Figure 6). A total of ten genomic islands (GIs) was predicted, in which GI7 overlapped with an intact prophage. Strain 891 harbored several significant pathogenic and virulence-related genes (Virulence Factors, VFs) including KatAB, ClpC, IdeR, RelA, and Mycobactin, which were potential targets for developing new treatment methods and therapies, as well as proposed functions shown in Table S5. The finding of 37 antibiotic resistance genes (AbR genes), 21 antibiotic target genes, and one antibiotic biosynthesis gene was made using the Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD). These antibiotic resistance genes of strain 891 are marked as triangles between circles 3 and 4 in Figure 6, and several genes (such as vanRO and mtrA) were found to be two-component system response regulators. CAZy (Carbohydrate-Active Enzymes Database) comprises families of enzymes related to glycosidic bond degradation, modification, and generation and consist of various classes including glycoside hydrolases (GHs), critical enzymes for lignocellulosic biomass degradation, glycosyl transferases (GTs), polysaccharide lyases (PLs), carbohydrate esterases (CEs), auxiliary active enzymes (AAs), and carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs) [23]. CAZy analysis of strain 891 revealed a total of 250 potential genes including 99 GHs, 62 GTs, 39 CEs, 23 CBMs, 21 AAs, and 6 PLs. 2.5. Analysis of Secondary Metabolite Biosynthetic Gene Clusters AntiSMASH analysis resulted in discovery of 26 putative secondary metabolite BGCs including 6 PKSs, 6 NRPSs, 5 terpenes, and 9 other unknown clusters in strain 891 (Table S4). Five of these BGCs showed high similarity (>80% of genes showed similarity) with those BGCs responsible for biosynthesis of geosmin, ectoine, desferrioxamine E, marineosin, and isorenieratene. It is noteworthy that cluster 21 displayed 74% similarity with reference chrysomycin BGC. The biosynthesis of gilvocarcins M and V consisted of two initial substrates (propionyl CoA and acetyl CoA) and nine malonyl CoAs as extending units as well as a series of successive oxidation, reduction, rearrangement, and methylation [9]. Owing to the same motif of chrysomycin and gilvocarcin, these natural products have similar biosynthetic pathways (Figure 7b). Considering the identity value, the BGC responsible for biosynthesis of chrysomycins was identified and consisted of 30 ORFs, which were respectively named based on their precedent chry genes (FN565166.1) from a cosmid library of Streptomyces albaduncus AD819 [24]. By further comparison with the characterized BGC for biosynthesis of chrysomycin in strain AD819 (Figure 7a), chry891 had fewer regulatory or resistance mediating genes, such as absent chryX and X4–9. Sequence alignment analysis suggested that chry891_R and chry891_M were two separate ORFs owing to presence of a stop codon between them. Nearly all genes responsible for the PK scaffold and other genes accountable for the sugar moiety were positionally adjusted in the corresponding part of the reference chry cluster. Blastp predicted chry891_X3 was one member of the Multiple Antibiotic Resistance Regulator (MarR) family. MarR homologs govern stress responses, pathogenicity, and the breakdown or export of hazardous substances such as phenolic compounds, antibiotics, and common household detergents [25]. Gene chry891_X2 was putatively responsible for coding CitB, a DNA-binding response regulator with REC and HTH domains, which belongs to the NarL/FixJ family. CitB is a member of the two-component regulatory system CitA/CitB, which is required for expression of citrate-specific fermentation genes. Phosphorylated CitB binds to two sites in the citS–citC intergenic region, where it probably activates transcription of both genes [26]. Besides that, three unknown genes were integrated in the chry891 cluster, and premised on their conserved domains, chry891_Xa was most likely emrB, encoding a DHA2 family efflux MFS (major facilitator superfamily) transporter permease subunit. As the largest family of transporters, the MFS is a typical type of multidrug resistance efflux pump, associated closely with antibiotic resistance and taking part in several important processes of bacterial cell physiology, including cell to cell communication, and increasing the virulence potential of several bacterial pathogens [27]. Chry891_Xb and chry891_Xc were predicted to encode 4′-phosphopantetheinyl transferase superfamily protein and FAD-dependent monooxygenase, which are important co-factors of secondary metabolite biosynthesis catalytic enzymes. Compared to chry cluster (FN565166.1), chry891 cluster retrenched at least seven genes involved in regulation or resistance and enlarged three candidates for regulatory or co-factors, which could further promote chrysomycin biosynthesis. In addition, the gene assemblies in charge of the PK scaffold and sugar moiety nearly swapped positions, which demonstrated the plasticity of horizontal gene transfer in type II PKS.