RESULTS Expression of ecm16 provides resistance against echinomycin Although previously proposed, there is no direct experimental data in the literature confirming that Ecm16 renders resistance against echinomycin (Watanabe et al., 2006). To provide this evidence and characterize Ecm16, we used E. coli K‐12 cells as a heterologous host system to express ecm16. The natively echinomycin‐sensitive E. coli cells were transformed with a low‐copy vector encoding ecm16 under the arabinose inducible promoter [p(ecm16)]. In the absence of echinomycin, E. coli cells with vector‐control‐only (VCO) reached saturation (OD600nm ~ 1.0) within a 6 h growth period (Figure 1b). The same VCO cells grown in the presence of 1 μM echinomycin only reached ~0.35 OD600nm within the same 6 h period. Almost no detectable growth was observed for VCO cells at echinomycin concentration of 10 μM or higher. In contrast, E. coli cells expressing ecm16 reached equivalent maximal densities when grown in the presence or in the absence of supplemented echinomycin. Using growth curve analyses, we determined the effect of ecm16 expression on bacterial doubling time (Figure S1). In the absence of echinomycin, E. coli with or without the expression of ecm16 were able to double every ~0.54 h under our growth conditions. However, in the presence of echinomycin, the doubling time of VCO cells increased nearly 4‐fold at the highest concentration used in this study. Remarkably, cells expressing ecm16 were able to maintain their normal doubling time up to levels of 20 μM echinomycin. Furthermore, we confirmed that Ecm16 renders resistance against echinomycin using survival assays under titrated levels of echinomycin (Figure 1c). These data revealed that echinomycin is bacteriostatic in E. coli. Ecm16 prevents cellular filamentation caused by exposure to echinomycin E. coli adopt filamentous shapes in response to a variety of stressful environments, including DNA damage and exposure to antibiotics (Adler & Hardigree, 1965; Kantor & Deering, 1966; Miller et al., 2004; Suzuki et al., 1967). To determine whether Ecm16 can prevent cellular filamentation, we analyzed the cell length of E. coli after exposure to echinomycin. The mean cell length of E. coli was determined to be ~2 μm when grown in the absence of echinomycin. Exposure to echinomycin resulted in cells with a broad cell length distribution (Figure 2a). We observed that the expression of ecm16 alone in the absence of echinomycin resulted in a ~15% increase in mean cell length compared to the VCO. However, when echinomycin was supplemented to cells expressing ecm16, cell length was not altered compared to the no echinomycin control treatment. To further characterize the potential mechanism involved in the filamentation observed in cells exposed to echinomycin, we analyzed the cell length of SOS mutant strains. Upon DNA damage, the SOS response is triggered to simultaneously accomplish at least two goals: repair the damage and halt cytokinesis while DNA repair is underway. RecA activates the SOS response by deactivating the repressors of SOS (Murli & Walker, 1993). SulA is made during SOS induction to prevent FtsZ assembly that ultimately inhibits cytokinesis (Bi & Lutkenhaus, 1993; Cordell et al., 2003; Gottesman et al., 1981; Huisman & D'Ari, 1981; Mizusawa et al., 1983). For our analyses, we used two E. coli strains with knockouts of genes encoding these two SOS regulators: recA and sulA (Keio Collection) (Baba et al., 2006). Our cell length analyses revealed that both mutant strains retained their filamentation phenotype upon exposure to echinomycin, suggesting that echinomycin triggers primarily an SOS‐independent filamentation in E. coli (Figure 2b,c). Based on average cell length, we observed a decrease in filamentation in response to echinomycin in the sulA and recA strains compared to the wildtype background, suggesting echinomycin can also trigger an SOS‐dependent filamentation, albeit to a lesser extent. Notably, the expression of ecm16 in both mutant strains recA and sulA prevented any filamentation. In summary, our in vivo analyses revealed that the expression of ecm16 in E. coli cells results in protection against the toxicity caused by echinomycin exposure. FIGURE 2
E. coli cells expressing ecm16 do not filament after echinomycin treatment. (a) Phase contrast microscopy of strains K12/p(VCO) (top panels) and K12/p(ecm16) (bottom panels) grown in the presence of inducer (arabinose 0.2%) supplemented with or without 5 μM echinomycin (ech). Cells were grown in the presence of echinomycin for 5 h and subsequently spotted on 1% agarose minimal media pads for imaging. Scale bar = 10 μm. (b) Scatter dot plots of cell size distribution of strains K12/p(VCO) and K12/p(ecm16) under wild‐type (WT), DsulA, and DrecA background supplemented with or without 5 μM echinomycin (ech). (c) Average cell length and standard error for 100 cells per condition are shown. 3% of cells displayed cell lengths over 25 μm (not included in plot). Cell lengths were measured using the software MicrobeJ. Representatives of three independent replicates are plotted. E. coli cells expressing ecm16 do not filament after echinomycin treatment. (a) Phase contrast microscopy of strains K12/p(VCO) (top panels) and K12/p(ecm16) (bottom panels) grown in the presence of inducer (arabinose 0.2%) supplemented with or without 5 μM echinomycin (ech). Cells were grown in the presence of echinomycin for 5 h and subsequently spotted on 1% agarose minimal media pads for imaging. Scale bar = 10 μm. (b) Scatter dot plots of cell size distribution of strains K12/p(VCO) and K12/p(ecm16) under wild‐type (WT), DsulA, and DrecA background supplemented with or without 5 μM echinomycin (ech). (c) Average cell length and standard error for 100 cells per condition are shown. 3% of cells displayed cell lengths over 25 μm (not included in plot). Cell lengths were measured using the software MicrobeJ. Representatives of three independent replicates are plotted. Ecm16 binds DNA in a nucleotide sequence‐independent manner We investigated how the local DNA structure influences Ecm16’s ability to recognize its substrate. The NER UvrA from E. coli and Mycobacterium tuberculosis has been shown to exhibit stronger affinity for single‐stranded DNA (ssDNA) versus double‐stranded DNA (dsDNA) (Rossi et al., 2011; Seeberg & Steinum, 1982). Using electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we characterized the DNA binding activity of purified recombinant Ecm16 to various DNA substrates (Table S1) (Figure 3a). The DNA substrates (32‐mer ssDNA and dsDNA oligonucleotides) used in these experiments were designed with sequences previously shown to be UvrA substrates (Jaciuk et al., 2011) modified at the center to contain a central echinomycin binding sequence (5‐ACGT‐3′). These substrates were chemically synthesized (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, Iowa) and incubated over a range of Ecm16 concentrations. Slower mobility species corresponding to DNA‐protein complex were generated as a result of DNA binding to Ecm16 (Figure 3a). Ecm16 displayed similar binding affinity to dsDNA (Kd = 34.8 nM) and ssDNA (Kd = 39.6 nM) (Figure 3b). The substrate affinity of Ecm16 increased when dsDNA was combined with echinomycin (Kd = 20.6 nM) (Figure 3a,b). Class I UvrA proteins are also known to display higher binding affinity for damaged DNA compared to non‐damaged DNA (Jaciuk et al., 2011; Rossi et al., 2011). Given that echinomycin intercalates DNA with a preference for CpG sites (Dawson et al., 2007; Van Dyke & Dervan, 1984), we tested whether Ecm16 displays stronger affinity for specific DNA sequences. We analyzed the binding of Ecm16 to DNA sequences with differing AT/GC content using electrophoretic mobility shift assays (Figure 3c). Our results revealed no significant differences in Ecm16’s substrate binding with varying AT/GC content, suggesting that Ecm16 primarily interacts with the DNA backbone, and not the bases. These data indicate that Ecm16 has substrate specificity and/or higher binding affinity for DNA‐echinomycin and binds DNA in a nucleotide sequence‐independent mode. FIGURE 3DNA binding activity of Ecm16. (a) Reaction mixtures contained 0.25 nM DNA substrate in the absence (lane 1) or presence of 5 to 60 nM Ecm16 with increment of 5 nM (lanes 2–13), (a) ssDNA; (b) dsDNA; (c) echinomycin‐DNA. (b) Fraction of ssDNA (panel (a)), dsDNA (panel (b)), echinomycin‐DNA (panel (c)) bound to Ecm16 is plotted against the indicated amounts of Ecm16. ssDNA (filled circles); dsDNA (filled squares); echinomycin‐DNA (filled triangles). Each point on the curves represents the mean of three separate experiments. (c) DNA binding activity of Ecm16 in presence of 100% GC and AT, 75%/25% and 50%/50% GC/AT composition 0.25 nM DNA substrates in the absence (lane 1) or presence of 5 to 30 nM Ecm16 with increment of 5 nM (lanes 2–7). DNA binding activity of Ecm16. (a) Reaction mixtures contained 0.25 nM DNA substrate in the absence (lane 1) or presence of 5 to 60 nM Ecm16 with increment of 5 nM (lanes 2–13), (a) ssDNA; (b) dsDNA; (c) echinomycin‐DNA. (b) Fraction of ssDNA (panel (a)), dsDNA (panel (b)), echinomycin‐DNA (panel (c)) bound to Ecm16 is plotted against the indicated amounts of Ecm16. ssDNA (filled circles); dsDNA (filled squares); echinomycin‐DNA (filled triangles). Each point on the curves represents the mean of three separate experiments. (c) DNA binding activity of Ecm16 in presence of 100% GC and AT, 75%/25% and 50%/50% GC/AT composition 0.25 nM DNA substrates in the absence (lane 1) or presence of 5 to 30 nM Ecm16 with increment of 5 nM (lanes 2–7). Ecm16 displays ATPase activity that is essential for echinomycin resistance The ATPase activity of UvrA is required for UvrA's ability to recognize DNA damage and initiate the repair mechanism (Oh et al., 1989; Thomas et al., 1985). Ecm16, similar to other UvrA homolog proteins, has high conservation of amino acids involved in ATP binding and hydrolysis, including those found in Walker A, Walker B, and the alpha‐helical ABC signature sequence (Figure S2). To determine whether Ecm16 displays ATPase activity and whether this activity is required in protection against echinomycin, we first characterized Ecm16’s ability to hydrolyze ATP in vitro. We used an enzyme‐coupled assay that utilizes the purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) (Figure 4a). During the reaction, PNP combines inorganic phosphate (Pi) produced by Ecm16’s ATPase with 2‐amino‐6‐mercapto‐7‐methylpurine (MESG) to form 2‐amino‐6‐mercapto‐7‐methylpurine. This enzymatic conversion of MESG results in a spectrophotometric shift that is monitored using a spectrophotometer. Ecm16 shows basal level ATP hydrolysis activity in the absence of any substrate, a characteristic which is also observed in class I UvrA (Rossi et al., 2011). The addition of dsDNA increased Ecm16’s ATPase specific activity ~10‐fold, indicating that the protein shows DNA‐dependent ATP hydrolysis activity. The addition of echinomycin‐dsDNA complex increased Ecm16’s ATPase activity ~200‐fold (Figure 4a). We next tested whether Ecm16’s ATPase activity is involved in its ability to render echinomycin resistance in vivo. To do that, we targeted two conserved lysine residues in UvrA‐type proteins that have been shown to be essential for scanning DNA and discriminating between native and damaged DNA (Kraithong et al., 2017; Pakotiprapha et al., 2012; Thiagalingam & Grossman, 1991, 1993). We engineered two Ecm16 variants: one at the proximal ATP‐binding site with the conserved residue Lys56 changed to an alanine, and the other at the distal site with Lys526 changed to an alanine. Our data revealed that E. coli cells exclusively expressing either Ecm16K56A or Ecm16K526A failed to rescue cells from echinomycin toxicity (Figure 4b). These data suggest that Ecm16 requires the energetics of ATP hydrolysis to render echinomycin resistance. FIGURE 4ATPase activity of Ecm16. (a) Specific activity of 0.2 μM purified Ecm16 in the presence or absence of 1 μM DNA and DNA‐echinomycin substrates. Error bars represent standard error of three independent experiments. The reaction mixture contained 2‐amino‐6‐mercapto‐7‐methylpurine (MESG) and purine nucleoside phosphorylase, 1 mM ATP and 10 mM MgCl2. A phosphate standard was measured to calibrate the UV absorbance signal to the amount of inorganic phosphate release. (b) Streak plates containing E. coli cultures containing a plasmid with WT ecm16 (p[emc16]), ecm16 ATP‐binding variant (p[emc16‐K526A]), or vector control (p(VCO)). Cultures were grown overnight and normalized to 0.5 OD600 before streaking on LB ampicillin plates containing 0.2% arabinose or 1 μM echinomycin (with 0.2% arabinose) and were incubated at 37°C overnight. Plates are representative of 3 independent trials. ATPase activity of Ecm16. (a) Specific activity of 0.2 μM purified Ecm16 in the presence or absence of 1 μM DNA and DNA‐echinomycin substrates. Error bars represent standard error of three independent experiments. The reaction mixture contained 2‐amino‐6‐mercapto‐7‐methylpurine (MESG) and purine nucleoside phosphorylase, 1 mM ATP and 10 mM MgCl2. A phosphate standard was measured to calibrate the UV absorbance signal to the amount of inorganic phosphate release. (b) Streak plates containing E. coli cultures containing a plasmid with WT ecm16 (p[emc16]), ecm16 ATP‐binding variant (p[emc16‐K526A]), or vector control (p(VCO)). Cultures were grown overnight and normalized to 0.5 OD600 before streaking on LB ampicillin plates containing 0.2% arabinose or 1 μM echinomycin (with 0.2% arabinose) and were incubated at 37°C overnight. Plates are representative of 3 independent trials. Ecm16’s echinomycin resistance activity does not require components of the NER system Based on similarities between Ecm16 and UvrA, we examined whether Ecm16’s mechanism of protective action against echinomycin resembles the activity of the DNA repair protein UvrA. In E. coli, UvrA or UvrA2‐UvrB2 detects DNA damage and recruits the rest of the NER system (UvrB/C/D) (Caron et al., 1985; Kisker et al., 2013; Orren & Sancar, 1989; Yeung et al., 1986). To address the possibility that Ecm16’s ability to render cells echinomycin resistant requires the function of NER components, we analyzed E. coli strains with knockouts of each individual component (uvrA, uvrB, uvrC, and uvrD; Keio Collection) (Baba et al., 2006) (Figure 5a). To each of these strains, we transformed the replicating plasmid encoding ecm16 or VCO. We tested the ability of these strains to grow in the presence of echinomycin concentrations that were tolerated by cells expressing ecm16. Our growth analyses revealed that cells encoding the NER system and cells without components of the NER system displayed similar doubling rates when grown in the presence of echinomycin. Ecm16 was able to provide the same level of echinomycin resistance in the absence of NER. FIGURE 5Ecm16 is not associated with classic NER function. (a) Exponential state growth curves (n = 3) of E. coli K12 strains with different components of the native nucleotide excision repair system (NER) knocked out (ΔuvrA, ΔuvrB, ΔuvrC, or ΔuvrD) and carrying vector‐control‐only or vector encoding ecm16. Cultures (2 ml) were set to OD600nm ~ 0.2 in rich media (LB) supplemented with the inducer (0.2% arabinose) and varying concentrations of echinomycin (0–10 μM). Growth was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 600 nm every 30 min. E. coli K12 NER knockouts show similar patterns of resistance to echinomycin in the presence of inducer for the expression of ecm16. Results are shown for exponential growth phase with exponential trend line, error bars represent SEM of duplicate replicates. All results shown are representative of three independent replicates. (b) Colony forming unit (CFU) assays after UV radiation. 5 μl of cultures grown to OD600nm ~ 0.2 were serial diluted (dilution factor = 5 × 10−1 to 10−6) and spotted on LB plates supplemented with 0.2% arabinose. Cultures included the following strains: Control sample (top row) are wild‐type cells with vector‐control‐only, test samples (middle 2nd and 3rd rows) are strains with the native E. coli's uvrA gene knocked out and with vector‐control‐only or vector encoding ecm16, complementation control strain (bottom row) encodes E. coli's native uvrA gene in the same pBAD vector. Freshly spotted plates were exposed to UV radiation and then incubated at 37°C for 18 h prior to imaging. The data shown are a representative of three independent replicates. Ecm16 is not associated with classic NER function. (a) Exponential state growth curves (n = 3) of E. coli K12 strains with different components of the native nucleotide excision repair system (NER) knocked out (ΔuvrA, ΔuvrB, ΔuvrC, or ΔuvrD) and carrying vector‐control‐only or vector encoding ecm16. Cultures (2 ml) were set to OD600nm ~ 0.2 in rich media (LB) supplemented with the inducer (0.2% arabinose) and varying concentrations of echinomycin (0–10 μM). Growth was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 600 nm every 30 min. E. coli K12 NER knockouts show similar patterns of resistance to echinomycin in the presence of inducer for the expression of ecm16. Results are shown for exponential growth phase with exponential trend line, error bars represent SEM of duplicate replicates. All results shown are representative of three independent replicates. (b) Colony forming unit (CFU) assays after UV radiation. 5 μl of cultures grown to OD600nm ~ 0.2 were serial diluted (dilution factor = 5 × 10−1 to 10−6) and spotted on LB plates supplemented with 0.2% arabinose. Cultures included the following strains: Control sample (top row) are wild‐type cells with vector‐control‐only, test samples (middle 2nd and 3rd rows) are strains with the native E. coli's uvrA gene knocked out and with vector‐control‐only or vector encoding ecm16, complementation control strain (bottom row) encodes E. coli's native uvrA gene in the same pBAD vector. Freshly spotted plates were exposed to UV radiation and then incubated at 37°C for 18 h prior to imaging. The data shown are a representative of three independent replicates. Ecm16 and UvrA cannot complement each other's function In E. coli, the activity of UvrA is essential for repairing various types of DNA damage including thymine dimers resulting from exposure to UV radiation (Boyce & Howard‐Flanders, 2003). To determine whether Ecm16 can complement UvrA's activity, we examined the ability of various strains to recover from UV radiation by performing colony‐forming unit (CFU) assays (Figure 5b). E. coli cells with their native uvrA gene and VCO can effectively recover from 10 J/m2 of UV radiation exposure as evidenced by the similar number of CFUs compared to the no‐radiation control. However, the cell's ability to recover from UV radiation is significantly reduced when E. coli's native uvrA gene is knocked out. Once uvrA was expressed in trans from a replicating plasmid under the control of the arabinose inducible promoter, the ability to repair DNA damage was fully recovered. These data are in accordance with previous analyses of uvrA knockout strains (Springall et al., 2018). However, when the gene encoding for Ecm16 was expressed in trans from the same replicating plasmid controlled by the arabinose promoter, E. coli cells were unable to recover from UV radiation. The number of CFUs of the strain expressing ecm16 was as diminished as the CFUs observed on the uvrA knock out strain. The same trend of UV resistance was also observed among the E. coli strains when lower levels of radiation (5 J/m2) were used. The inability of Ecm16 to complement an uvrA knockout suggests that Ecm16 is unable to recognize thymine dimers and/or recruit the rest of the NER system for proper DNA repair. Given that E. coli K‐12 cells display sensitivity to echinomycin suggested that UvrA is unable to protect from echinomycin toxicity. To determine whether increasing the cellular levels of UvrA would result in protection against echinomycin, we constructed an E. coli strain with two copies of uvrA: its native copy and a second copy expressed in trans from a replicating plasmid (same vector used for ecm16 expression). Cells expressing uvrA from the inducible promoter grown in the presence of echinomycin display the same growth defect as the empty vector control (Figure S3). These results confirm that UvrA and Ecm16 cannot complement each other's function due to either differences in damage detection and/or repair.