RESULTS The supernatant of S. rapamycinicus is sufficient to induce yellow pigment and orsellinic acid production To better understand the interaction between A. nidulans and S. rapamycinicus, we set up an experimental system that allowed us to differentiate fungal hyphae directly interacting with S. rapamycinicus from non‐directly interacting fungal cells. This setup used fungal and bacterial cultures grown on solid surface in contrast to the previously applied conditions of co‐culturing them in liquid shake flasks. In the actual approach the fungal and the bacterial colonies were inoculated at opposing sides of a Petri dish that contained only agar without nutrients. To allow for some limited growth of the inoculated fungal and bacterial cells, the points of inoculation were supplied with nutrients. This set‐up produced a thin, low‐density fungal colony spreading out over the agar surface and this allowed us to easily observe colour or morphological changes of the colonies. Figure 1(A) top shows an example of the experiment in which fungal inoculation points were fed with AMM and bacterial inoculation points with M79 media. Starting from these nutrient reservoirs at the opposite sides of the Petri dish the organisms were able to grow into the nutrient‐free agar. Using this setup, we observed that fungal mycelium spreading from the opposite side towards the bacterial colony was producing some YPs although there was no direct contact yet with the S. rapamycinicus colony [Figure 1(A)]. No colour changes at the A. nidulans mycelia were observed in control experiments growing the fungal cells alone (data not shown). These observations indicated that YPKs and orsellinic acid may be produced by A. nidulans cells in response to the presence of S. rapamycinicus already before their physical contact takes place. To make sure there is no direct interaction via buried bacterial or fungal cell interactions we used a similar setup but containing S. rapamycinicus cells within a dialysis tube. The molecular weight cut off 8.000–10.000 kDa allowed nutrients passing through the membrane at the point of inoculation but prevented bacterial cells to spread on or through the agar. We found also in this setup an induction of YPs [Figure 1(B)]. We assume that the reduced induction in these experiments is likely caused by the dialysis tube barrier affecting free metabolite movements. To test if the signal for fungal pigment production requires actively growing bacterial cells or if a bacterial metabolite may be sufficient to induce YPs we subsequently applied sterile‐filtered culture supernatant from an S. rapamycinicus liquid culture grown in M79 media without A. nidulans. When adding these bacterial culture supernatants to an A. nidulans colony growing alone on the nutrient‐free agar we also observed YP production, although colouration was less intense [Figure 1(C)]. Since in this latter approach S. rapamycinicus was grown ‘solo’ without A. nidulans, we could conclude that production of the YPs in A. nidulans is triggered by one or more compounds secreted by S. rapamycinicus cells growing in M79 medium and that the production of this inducer(s) does not depend on the presence of a competing or interacting organism. However, the presence of a competing organism like A. nidulans may cause elevated production of this unknown molecule(s). FIGURE 1(A) Top: Schematic setup; Aspergillus minimal medium (AMM) and M79 medium were placed into phosphate‐buffered water agar (green and blue circles, respectively). AMM and M79 media were inoculated with A. nidulans (A.n.) and S. rapamycinicus (S.r.), respectively, and incubated for 7 days at 30°C. Bottom: Yellow pigments (YPs) production, (red arrow) of A. nidulans growing on phosphate‐buffered water agar towards S. rapamycinicus colonies. (B) Top: Schematic setup; similar as Figure 1(A), except that S. rapamycinicus was inoculated into a dialysis tube partially filled with M79 medium thus preventing physical contact with A. nidulans cells from the confronting fungal colony. Bottom: red arrow points to the YPs that can also be observed in this setup after 7 days at 30°C, although to a lesser extent. (C) 10 μl of media supernatant (Super) from S. rapamycinicus grown ‘solo’ in liquid M79 for 7 days at 30°C was applied opposite to a growing A. nidulans colony (six well plate) and a clear YPs production was observed (A) Top: Schematic setup; Aspergillus minimal medium (AMM) and M79 medium were placed into phosphate‐buffered water agar (green and blue circles, respectively). AMM and M79 media were inoculated with A. nidulans (A.n.) and S. rapamycinicus (S.r.), respectively, and incubated for 7 days at 30°C. Bottom: Yellow pigments (YPs) production, (red arrow) of A. nidulans growing on phosphate‐buffered water agar towards S. rapamycinicus colonies. (B) Top: Schematic setup; similar as Figure 1(A), except that S. rapamycinicus was inoculated into a dialysis tube partially filled with M79 medium thus preventing physical contact with A. nidulans cells from the confronting fungal colony. Bottom: red arrow points to the YPs that can also be observed in this setup after 7 days at 30°C, although to a lesser extent. (C) 10 μl of media supernatant (Super) from S. rapamycinicus grown ‘solo’ in liquid M79 for 7 days at 30°C was applied opposite to a growing A. nidulans colony (six well plate) and a clear YPs production was observed Yellow pigment production correlates with metabolites from the orsellinic acid pathway As the direct physical A. nidulans–S. rapamycinicus interaction was shown to trigger the production of ORS and YPs, we then tested if production of the pigments in our test system indeed correlate with these metabolites. For chemical analysis a similar, but larger size set‐up of our nutrient‐free agar cultivation assay was used (Petri dishes with 15 cm diameter) where we grew the organisms for 7 days. Subsequently, in a 9 × 4 grid, agar blocks of 1 cm × 1 cm size were cut out, extracted and metabolites within these agar blocks were subsequently analysed via photometric absorption measurements at 400 nm and by HPLC‐MS [Figure 2(A) and Figure S1]. FIGURE 2(A) Top/left: Experimental setup with an example of the confrontation assay on agar plates and a magnified section of it below the plate photograph. The raster with numbers represents areas that were cut out from the agar and analysed by mass spectrometry (see Experimental procedures). Growing S. rapamycinicus cells are indicated by blue line circled areas, the A. nidulans colony is indicated by green line circled areas; dotted green line shows the extent of fungal growth (complete right‐hand side of plate is covered by fine mycelia). Dotted black circles indicate the areas of AMM or M79 media in the plate. Conidiation is strongest in the region facing the S. rapamycinicus colony. Heatmaps show metabolite concentrations found in the respective regions, positions of colonies are indicated by blue and green lines. Below the photograph in panel A, heatmaps are shown that represent metabolite concentrations found in the respective region originating from S. rapamycinicus. (B) Heatmaps representing metabolite concentrations of the A. nidulans colony. Absorption (400 nm) representing YPs. Levels of other A. nidulans metabolites are shown as separate heatmaps. Abbreviations: Terra: terragine: Ors: orsellinic acid; Lecanoric: lecanoric acid; meth‐Ors: methyl orsellinic acid; Viol I: violaceol I; Viol II: violaceol II; Nig: nigericin (A) Top/left: Experimental setup with an example of the confrontation assay on agar plates and a magnified section of it below the plate photograph. The raster with numbers represents areas that were cut out from the agar and analysed by mass spectrometry (see Experimental procedures). Growing S. rapamycinicus cells are indicated by blue line circled areas, the A. nidulans colony is indicated by green line circled areas; dotted green line shows the extent of fungal growth (complete right‐hand side of plate is covered by fine mycelia). Dotted black circles indicate the areas of AMM or M79 media in the plate. Conidiation is strongest in the region facing the S. rapamycinicus colony. Heatmaps show metabolite concentrations found in the respective regions, positions of colonies are indicated by blue and green lines. Below the photograph in panel A, heatmaps are shown that represent metabolite concentrations found in the respective region originating from S. rapamycinicus. (B) Heatmaps representing metabolite concentrations of the A. nidulans colony. Absorption (400 nm) representing YPs. Levels of other A. nidulans metabolites are shown as separate heatmaps. Abbreviations: Terra: terragine: Ors: orsellinic acid; Lecanoric: lecanoric acid; meth‐Ors: methyl orsellinic acid; Viol I: violaceol I; Viol II: violaceol II; Nig: nigericin Results of these chemical analyses showed that several metabolites of the ORS biosynthetic pathway were detectable in the extracts obtained from agar samples derived directly from, or from the vicinity of the A. nidulans cells growing towards the S. rapamycinicus colony. The concentrations of ORS, as well as lecanoric acid (LEC), showed strong correlation with the absorption at 400 nm that visually appears as yellow colour (Spearmen rho: 0.72 and 0.70 for ORS or LEC, respectively, with p‐values of 6.36E‐7 or 1.52E‐6, see also correlation plot in supplementary Figure S2). These data indicated that our macroscopically observed YPs actually contain ORS and LEC. Additional fungal metabolites have been found in the analysed agar blocks (Figure S1). Some of them are also found in higher quantities in the competition zone between fungal and bacterial colonies, but others are more abundant in blocks excised from regions outside of the competition zone. Interestingly, also S. rapamycinicus metabolites seem to be induced by the presence of the fungal mycelium, for example terragine is clearly more abundant in the competition zone between the two organisms than anywhere else in the agar of the Petri dish. On the other hand, production of the fungal diketopiperazines cyclo(l‐Pro‐l‐Tyr) and cyclo(l‐Pro‐l‐Val) are apparently repressed by the interaction and they show a comparatively lower abundance in this zone (see Figure 2 and Figure S1 with measurements for additional metabolites). Taken together, our experiments showed that an active communication based on secreted metabolites takes place between these two organisms and that the cellular responses do not depend on physical interaction among them. Different concentrations of specific SMs at different locations within the whole growth area moreover indicate that fungal and bacterial metabolites can be induced or repressed by the chemical signals generated by the cultures. The inducer of YPs comprising orsellinic and lecanoric acid is a guanidine‐containing polyhydroxyl macrolide To identify the metabolite(s) from S. rapamycinicus inducing YPs in A. nidulans we grew S. rapamycinicus in the absence of fungal cells ‘solo’ in M79 medium for 7 days and used a sterile‐filtered culture supernatant for the development of an A. nidulans bioassay that would monitor YP induction. The fungal bioassay was based on miniature cultures in a 24‐well microtiter plate format where we grew A. nidulans colonies in submerged cultures and were able to use simple colour change of the medium as an indicator of YP production (see details in Experimental procedures). Using this assay we could confirm that the supernatant of S. rapamycinicus cultures was indeed inducing YP in A. nidulans and thus can be used for bioassay‐guided fractionation tests. Subsequently, several liquid–liquid extraction methods (n‐Hexane, Dichlormethane, Acetonitrile) were tested and we found that the YP inducer always remained in the aqueous phase indicating that it is a polar substance that may be extractable with methanol. Finally, S. rapamycinicus was grown massively on M79 agar plates and the methanol extracts were then further fractionated successively using flash column chromatography and preparative HPLC. All fractions were then tested in the bioassay for YP‐inducing activity. Subsequent structural elucidation of the purified active fraction by HPLC‐MS/MS and NMR identified the guanidine‐containing polyhydroxyl macrolide polaramycin B as the YP, that is ORS and LEC inducing compound (Figure 3). FIGURE 3Structure of Polaramycin B. The C17–C21 hemiketal ring has been shown to be important for antimicrobial activity, whereas C23 malonyl reduced antimicrobial activity Structure of Polaramycin B. The C17–C21 hemiketal ring has been shown to be important for antimicrobial activity, whereas C23 malonyl reduced antimicrobial activity The polaramycin B biosynthetic gene cluster To bioinformatically identify the so far uncharacterized polaramycin biosynthetic genes, we performed antiSMASH (Medema et al., 2011) searches of six different Streptomyces strains including S. rapamycinicus, S. lateritius, S. zaomyceticus, S. ederensis, S. europaeiscabiei and S. iraniensis based on published genome sequences and annotations. As polaramycin is similar to azalomycin, a well‐characterized guanidine‐containing macrolide, we assumed that similarity to the known azalomycin BGC would be indicative for a BGC potentially responsible for polaramycin production. Only in S. rapamycinicus and S. iraniensis a homology with the azalomycin F3a BGC from Streptomyces sp. 211726 (MIBiG accession: BGC0001523) could be detected (Figure 4). To substantiate our hypothesis, we also cultivated isolates of four additional Streptomyces species under identical conditions as done before for S. rapamycinicus. Strikingly, only the two species S. rapamycinicus and S. iranensis, which contained the predicted gene cluster similar to the azalomycin cluster in their genomes, induced YP production. In contrast, the other four species not harbouring these BGCs showed no YPs (see Figure S3). These findings suggest that the region showing homology to the azalomycin biosynthesis cluster is responsible for the production of polaramycin in S. rapamycinicus and S. iraniensis and thus for YP induction. The data pertaining to S. iranensis metabolites are published separately from this manuscript in the context of azalomycins distribution and putative functions in microbial interactions (pre‐print available at BioRxiv by Krespach et al., doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.05.09.491136). FIGURE 4Homology search (anti‐SMASH) in S. rapamycinicus, S. iraniensis, S. zaomyceticus, S. ederensis, S. lateritius and S. europaeiscabiei for putative secondary metabolite clusters. Only S. rapamycinicus and S. iraniensis induce YPs, both containing a homologous azalomycin F3a gene cluster (black box). Red colour indicates percent homology Homology search (anti‐SMASH) in S. rapamycinicus, S. iraniensis, S. zaomyceticus, S. ederensis, S. lateritius and S. europaeiscabiei for putative secondary metabolite clusters. Only S. rapamycinicus and S. iraniensis induce YPs, both containing a homologous azalomycin F3a gene cluster (black box). Red colour indicates percent homology Dose–response of polaramycin B Since induction of orsellinic acid production was previously only observed when S. rapamycinicus and A. nidulans interacted physically, we reasoned that in these former liquid shake co‐cultures the local concentration of polaramycin B at the fungal cell surface may not have been sufficiently high to induce the metabolic changes. In this former set‐up, the concentration necessary to trigger ORS induction may only have been reached when cells directly interacted with each other because this physical interaction prevented immediate diffusion of the inducer away from the fungal cell surface. We, therefore, tested YPs production and orsA gene expression in A. nidulans cultures treated with different concentrations of polaramycin B in our 24 well plate bioassay. We found that after 48 h of incubation a concentration of 0.5 μg/ml polaramycin B in the A. nidulans growth medium is necessary to induce YPs as well as orsA transcription (Figure S4). This concentration was then used in our genome‐wide transcriptional analysis aimed at determining whether polaramycin B treatment induced a similar genetic response as previously observed in the physical interaction and if other fungal SMs are also affected by the addition of polaramycin B treatment. Moreover, the identification of transcriptional network changes by the treatment is of interest to understand which fungal targets are affected by this compound. Polaramycin B induces the dba1–dba2 gene cluster for ORS biosynthesis For RNA‐seq analysis, we used A. nidulans cultures pre‐grown for 18 h in AMM shake cultures and subsequently added polaramycin B at a concentration of 0.5 μg/ml. As the transcriptional network changes triggered by the substance may differ depending on the duration of treatment, we chose two different harvesting times. To test for the short‐term response, we harvested the mycelia after 30 min of incubation and for the response to an extended treatment time the cultures were harvested after 3 h of incubation with polaramycin B. It needs to be mentioned that at this time point there is still 0.45%–0.5% glucose remaining in the AMM medium, a concentration that is known to repress starvation‐induced SMs, such as the production of sterigmatocystin. To control if under these conditions polaramycin B also induces YPs and ORS, we first tested the expression levels of orsA (AN7909), the polyketide synthase‐encoding gene. Using RT‐qPCR we could confirm the induction event (data not shown) and we thus used these samples for RNA sequencing via Illumina Hi‐Seq. In respect to the ORS gene cluster, our data analysis showed that the genes of the split dba1–dba2 cluster are induced by polaramycin B treatment (Figure 5). Moreover, the regulatory gene dbaA, which encodes the specific transcription factor of this BGC, and which resides within the dba1 cluster, is induced already after 30 min. Consistent with DbaA being the cluster‐specific transcriptional activator protein, other genes within the dba1–dba2 BGC were found to be induced after 3 h post‐treatment. Interestingly, one gene of unknown function (AN7913, designated orsD) and located within the dba2 region also shows the same induction kinetics as the transcription factor (induction after 30 min). Other dba1 cluster genes residing in the neighbourhood of the dbaA transcription factor gene also seemed to be induced after 30 min. This result may hint towards a local chromatin effect that renders the dbaA‐containing region transcriptionally active. FIGURE 5(A) Colour‐coded transcript levels (RPKM) of dba cluster genes, columns represent time after polaramycin B treatment. Gene names or descriptions are shown if available. The transcription factor dbaA is already induced after 30 min following treatment, what seems not to be the case for the remaining cluster genes, which are induced at the later time point, presumably only after the transcription factor protein DbaA was translated and activated. AN7916 and AN7907 are not induced at all and may not be part of the dba cluster. (B) Genome and chromatin organization of both dba1 and dba2 derivative of benzaldehyde 1 gene clusters. Red graph shows histone H3K4 methylation after 18 h, taken from Gacek‐Matthews et al. (2016), a single significant peak found in AN7913 (A) Colour‐coded transcript levels (RPKM) of dba cluster genes, columns represent time after polaramycin B treatment. Gene names or descriptions are shown if available. The transcription factor dbaA is already induced after 30 min following treatment, what seems not to be the case for the remaining cluster genes, which are induced at the later time point, presumably only after the transcription factor protein DbaA was translated and activated. AN7916 and AN7907 are not induced at all and may not be part of the dba cluster. (B) Genome and chromatin organization of both dba1 and dba2 derivative of benzaldehyde 1 gene clusters. Red graph shows histone H3K4 methylation after 18 h, taken from Gacek‐Matthews et al. (2016), a single significant peak found in AN7913 Polaramycin B also induces other BGCs Our transcriptome data allowed us to analyse whether other BGCs were also affected by the polaramycin B treatment. Indeed, we found that several other BGCs are also changed in their transcriptional activity. For example, a majority of genes in the terrequinone (Bouhired et al., 2007) or aspercryptin (Henke et al., 2016) BGCs are significantly upregulated. Some BGCs showed only partial activity, such as the asperfuranone or the AN10289 cluster (Klejnstrup et al., 2012), in which only roughly half of the predicted cluster genes are induced. Interestingly the penicillin cluster, whose three genes are already transcribed at intermediate levels in our overnight cultures, is significantly downregulated by polaramycin B treatment (see Table 1). Thus, apart from the YPs and few other substances, the majority of BGCs do not show significant alterations in their expression profiles. This transcriptional response is similar to what has been also observed in the previous experiments in which A. nidulans cells experienced direct physical contact with S. rapamycinicus (Schroeckh et al., 2009). These findings indicate that polaramycin B is the responsible substance that mediates the transcriptional response of A. nidulans in the S. rapamycinicus interaction. Selection of BGCs with differentially regulated genes (between 0 and 0.5 h or between 0.5 and 3 h samples) BGC Upregulated Downregulated Total. Derivative of Benzaldehyde 1 (dba) and F9775 hybrid cluster 1 and 2 17 (2, 15) 0 19. AN7884 (Aspercryptin)cluster 13 (4, 13) 0 15. Terrequinone (tdi) cluster 4 (0, 4) 0 5. Penicillin cluster 0 2 (0, 2) 3. AN5318 cluster 2 (1, 1) 1 (1, 0) 5. Asperfuranone (afo) cluster 4 (0, 4) 1 (0, 1) 9. AN9129 cluster 1 (0, 1) 0 2. AN9314 cluster 1 (0, 1) 0 2. pkdA cluster 5 (0, 5) 0 11. AN10289 cluster 2 (0, 2) 0 5. Upregulated, downregulated and total refer to number of genes at least twofold upregulated or downregulated and total number of genes predicted or shown to belong to the given cluster, respectively. Genes differentially regulated between 0 and 30 min or between 30 min and 3 h are comma separated in brackets. The induction kinetic suggests possible modes of action of polaramycin B We have been involved in the elucidation of the BasR and chromatin‐based mechanisms by which S. rapamycinicus changes the A. nidulans metabolism during their physical interaction (Fischer et al., 2018). To identify putative targets of polaramycin and analyse the possible overlap between physical interaction and chemically triggered responses, the transcriptional profiles were grouped into eight clusters (see Figure 6): Immediately upregulated to steady state (A1); Immediately downregulated to steady state (A2); Immediately upregulated and continuously further upregulated (B1); Immediately downregulated and continuously further downregulated (B2); Delayed upregulated (C1); Delayed downregulated (C2); transiently upregulated (D1); transiently downregulated (D2). FIGURE 6Gene‐set clustering of induction kinetics in response to Polaramycin B at three time points. The combination of a p‐value <0.01 and a differential expression of ±1 was considered a significant differential expression. Y‐axes of diagrams show transcript levels, x‐axes represent time. Total number of genes in each clustered gene set is shown in bold numbers, barplots show GO term enrichments, bar length represent number of genes, number within barplots shows corrected p‐values Gene‐set clustering of induction kinetics in response to Polaramycin B at three time points. The combination of a p‐value <0.01 and a differential expression of ±1 was considered a significant differential expression. Y‐axes of diagrams show transcript levels, x‐axes represent time. Total number of genes in each clustered gene set is shown in bold numbers, barplots show GO term enrichments, bar length represent number of genes, number within barplots shows corrected p‐values A significant regulation was assumed if absolute log2 difference was greater than 1 and p‐value was less than 0.01. The contrasts considered were between time point zero and 30 min as well as between 30 min and 3 h. In case of disagreement between log2 difference and p‐value no differential regulation was assumed. To identify processes possibly involved in the polaramycin response we searched for overrepresented GO annotations in each gene set (Ashburner et al., 2000). Genes immediately responding to polaramycin B treatment Interestingly, in the gene set of genes ‘immediately upregulated to steady state’ (A1, 125 genes) GO annotations associated with translation or ribosome biosynthesis were significantly overrepresented. The genes with these annotations in cluster A1 were already transcribed at intermediate levels but polaramycin B caused a significant increase at least twofold. In addition to the translation process, also few genes putatively associated with membrane stability and function are found in this immediately induced gene set like AN3125 (predicted role in response to stress and integral to membrane localization), AN7327 (predicted glycosylphosphatidylinositol GPI‐anchored protein), AN9342 (predicted role in transmembrane transport and integral to membrane localization) among the highest differentially expressed genes. In the gene set of genes ‘immediately downregulated to steady state’ (A2, 236 genes) the GO annotation ‘Lipid metabolic process’ was significantly enriched which supports the findings that the antifungal activity of macrolides (like Azalomycin F) is based on disturbance and leakage of the phospholipid cell membrane (Sugawara, 1967). But in our experiments, we found only few genes differentially regulated with the GO annotation ‘Response to osmotic stress’ (e.g. AN065) which could be a hint that the cell membrane disturbance caused by polaramycin B has no large impact or can be well counteracted by the fungal metabolism, such as by those induced genes mentioned above coding for membrane stability functions. The rather small gene set B1 of genes ‘immediately and continuously upregulated’ (22 genes) mainly contains the upregulated BGCs, such as two genes from the dba cluster and three genes from the AN7884 cluster (aspercryptin) as well as one from the AN0016 cluster (pes1). Statistically, no significant GO term enrichment could be detected what may be due to the small size of this gene set. Also the gene set B2 of genes ‘immediately and continuously downregulated’ is rather small (16 genes) and contains mainly transport‐related genes. For example, AN9168 (putative solute‐hydrogen symporter activity with role in glycerol transmembrane transport), AN6277 (predicted role in transmembrane transport), AN4277 (putative glucose transmembrane transporter activity), AN3489 (putative endoplasmic reticulum localization) and AN6071 (domains with predicted membrane localization) are found in this gene set. Genes only responding to extended polaramycin B incubation We could observe that a larger number of genes are only differentially expressed after prolonged treatment with polaramycin B. These genes were grouped into sets C1 and C2 comprising 638 upregulated and 573 downregulated genes. The upregulated gene set C1 showed no concise picture in respect to enriched GO terms but next to a diverse array of predicted gene functions, it contained basically all upregulated BGCs discussed above. Most of the dba cluster genes fall into this C1 gene set as well as several other SM cluster genes (see Table 1) In addition to BGCs, some of the strongest induced genes have a linkage to oxidative stress responses, like AN7893, which has predicted oxidoreductase activity, AN9315 has a role in NADH oxidation and regulation of reactive oxygen species, AN5397 is a copper‐containing laccase that oxidizes phenolic substrates or AN2559 with predicted nucleotide‐binding and oxidoreductase activity. The fact that these genes are upregulated upon prolonged polaramycin B treatment may be a result of a disturbed membrane potential triggered by the substance eventually causing oxidative stress. If this stress is the ‘real’ inducer of YPs remains to be determined. Predicted functions of genes downregulated upon prolonged polaramycin treatment (gene set C2) are associated with GO terms like hyphal growth, DNA replication or cell cycle regulation. This indicates that polaramycin B treatment impairs growth processes, a result that we have already observed in our phenotyping plate assays (Figures 1 and 2). As can be seen in Figure 6 for the gene set C2 general catabolism‐related GO terms fall into this category. These include AN7180 and AN7541, which are two cutinases involved in carbohydrate catabolism, AN11188 with a putative role in endocrocin biosynthetic process, AN2719 with cell wall peptidoglycan catabolic process, AN11159 with phospholipid biosynthetic process. Also, many proteolytic or hydrolytic enzymes are found in this gene set: AN7121 (predicted metallocarboxypeptidase), AN5558 (alkaline protease), AN111981 (predicted UDP‐N‐acetylmuramate dehydrogenase), AN1583 and AN0009 (predicted hydrolase), AN3393 (similarity to neutral metalloprotease II), AN7962 (deuterolysin‐type metalloproteinase), AN8445 (Putative aminopeptidase). The complete list of genes is shown in Supplementary Table S1. The downregulation of these hydrolytic enzymes may be a result of the reduced growth probably to avoid self‐digestion or a reduced turnover of metabolites to not allow potential competitors to feed easily on such generated metabolites. Genes with a transient response to polaramycin treatment There are genes that have a strong short‐term response to the treatment with polaramycin B (measured after 30 min of exposure) but this response is lost upon prolonged treatment with the drug (measured after 3 h of exposure) Gene set D1 holds 54 genes which are immediately upregulated by the presence of polaramycin B but no response is observed any more in the 3 h treatment cultures. No clear picture comes out from this gene set but two GPI‐anchored proteins (AN7792 a putative lysophospholipase A and AN8609), AN2798 (predicted role in response to stress and integral to membrane localization), AN0209 (mepB, high‐affinity ammonium transporter), AN4372 (pgaB, a protein with polygalacturonase activity) have been found in this gene set. This may hint towards a reaction on the membrane due to polaramycin B that is transient as the cell may be able to balance the membrane defects after the respective genes have been induced and new membrane components have been produced. Also, quite a significant number of genes were found to be transiently repressed by polaramycin B treatment. Ninety genes were found in this set of genes designated D2 (Figure 6). Interestingly three genes associated with trehalose, an important storage carbohydrate in fungi, are in this gene set, AN9340 (treA), AN10533 and AN5523 (tpsA). Since trehalose plays also an important role in conidial stability, this may be a reflection of the dynamics following the immediate downregulation of carbohydrate metabolic processes (see gene set A2) post polaramycin B treatment.