Results Construction of SaindC-Based Markerless Gene Deletion System Although the indigoidine BGC was noted to be activated in S. albidoflavus J1074 [13], the indigoidine synthetase gene (SaindC) located in this BGC has never been used in any reporter system. The SaindC presents 87.73% amino acid sequence identity to idgS or bpsA which had been used as a reporter gene in Streptomyces (Fig. 1A) [10, 11, 24, 25]. To verify the function of SaIndC, SaindC from S. albidoflavus J1074 was cloned into an integrative vector pSOK804 under control of the kasOp* promoter [19, 26]. The resulting vector pINT01 (Fig. 1B) and pSOK804 were then introduced into S. chattanoogensis L10 by conjugation. The recombinants were cultured on YMG agar plates for 5 days, where the blue indigoidine was observed in the recombinants of L10/pINT01, but not in the recombinants of L10/pSOK804 (Fig. 1C). This implies that the kasOp*-SaindC cassette can be used as a reporter system. To achieve markerless large-fragment deletion in Streptomyces, the suicide vector pSUC01 derived from pSET152 was constructed [27], in which the integrase gene int phiC31 was deleted while the kasOp*-SaindC cassette was inserted. For the convenience of the cloning of homologous fragments, the multi-cloning sites were redesigned near the kasOp*-SaindC cassette (Fig. 1D). For the traditional markerless deletion system in Streptomyces, a time-consuming replica plating step is required to distinguish the single-crossover mutants that are resistant to the specific antibiotic from the sensitive non-single-crossover colonies (reverted wild-type or double-crossover mutants, Fig. 2A). In our method, with the SaindC-based reporter system, the colonies of single-crossover mutant (blue), double-crossover mutant (original color), and reverted wild-type (original color) can be easily characterized based on the colony color with no need for replica plating (Figs. 2B-2C). Deletion of the 10 kb Azoxymycin BGC in S. chattanoogensis L10 S. chattanoogensis L10 is an industrial natamycin-producing strain [14], whereas the yellow azoxymycin is a byproduct in the natamycin production process. The 10 kb azoxymycin BGC had been cloned and characterized in 2015 [28]. Based on a proof-of-concept of the feasibility and efficiency of the SaindC-based markerless deletion system, this relatively small BGC was selected as our first target to delete (Fig. 3A). The suicide vector pSUC02 was used for deleting this BGC. After conjugation, only blue colonies (single-crossover mutant) were noted on the plates containing apramycin, and thus no PCR validations were required. Three randomly selected blue colonies were collected and streaked onto the YMG agar plates without apramycin to ensure the occurrence of the second homologous recombination (HR). Following two rounds of non-selective growth, 644 colonies were identified from 22 plates, and 94 out of 644 (15%) colonies were white. This signifies that 85% of the colonies were still single-crossover mutants (blue) and could be excluded simply based on the color of the colony, and hence 4-5 days for the replica plating step was saved. In addition, among the 94 white colonies, 39 colonies produced yellow substance (wild-type revertant) and the other 55 colonies did not (double-crossover mutants), four white colonies without yellow substance secreted into the plate and four white colonies that generated yellow substance into the plate were randomly selected and verified using PCR with primer pair Δazo-out-F/Δazo-out-R. The PCR finding revealed that all of the four colonies that secreted no yellow substance were double-crossover mutants (Fig. 3B). Furthermore, one randomly selected double-crossover mutant (designated L10-Δazo) was cultured on a YMG plate, while the cultivation and fermentation procedure was performed as described above. As shown in Fig. 3C, L10-Δazo produced no yellow substance on the plate or in the fermentation broth. Notably, the HPLC analysis result elucidated that no azoxymycin was detected in the L10-Δazo mutant (Fig. 3D), indicating that the 10 kb azoxymycin BGC has been successfully deleted. Deletion of the 37 kb Daunorubicin BGC in S. coeruleorubidus The S. coeruleorubidus strain used in this study is an industrial daunorubicin-producing strain purchased from China Center of Industrial Culture Collection (CICC). To examine the universal applicability of this markerless deletion system and test its ability to deleting larger gene clusters, a 37 kb daunorubicin BGC in S. coeruleorubidus was chosed as our next target (Fig. 4A). After conjugation and non-selective growth, it was observed that the proportion of blue colonies (single-crossover mutants) was 47.74% among all 15 plates, the rest 52.26% colonies exhibited the original color of S. coeruleorubidus. Eight random selected colonies with original color were transferred to another agar plate for sporulation. Five days later, it was found that 6 colonies secreted light red pigment (the color of daunorubicin) into the plate while the other 2 colonies yielded no color change. The PCR result suggested that those two colonies were daunorubicin BGC knockout mutants (Fig. 4B). Subsequently, the verified daunorubicin BGC knockout mutants and wild-type S. coeruleorubidus were grown on the ISP4 plate (Fig. 4C), and then fermentation procedures and chromatographic analysis assay were executed. The HPLC results further confirmed the deletion of the daunorubicin BGC, no daunorubicin was detected in the knockout mutants (Fig. 4D). Deletion of the 74 kb Salinomycin BGC in S. albus ZD11 S. albus ZD11 is a derivative of an industrial high-yielding salinomycin-producing strain [15]. The high yield of salinomycin suggests that S. albus ZD11 can provide abundant acyl-CoA precursors for polyketide synthesis and has good potential to be an efficient microbial chassis for PKS synthesis. However, due to the lack of available episomal expression vectors, the CRISPR/Cas9 system could not be used in this strain. To further examine the universal applicability of this markerless deletion system, the 74 kb salinomycin BGC was selected as our third target to delete. Similarly, two 2.2 kb homologous fragments flanking salinomycin BGC were inserted into pSUC01 to generate pSUC04. Then the vector was introduced into S. albus ZD11 through conjugation to delete the target large fragment (Fig. 5A). After non-selective growth, 32.66% of the colonies among 10 plates appeared to be blue, the rest 67.34% colonies exhibited to be white (the original color of S. albus ZD11). Eight white colonies were randomly selected and verified using PCR with primer pair Δsal-out-F/Δsal-out-R, if the whole gene cluster was deleted, an 833 bp PCR product would be obtained. The findings revealed that 2 out of 8 white colonies were double-crossover mutants (Fig. 5B), which were designated as ZD11-Δsal-1 and ZD11-Δsal-2. In addition, the ZD11-Δsal-1 mutant and the S. albus ZD11 WT strain were cultured in the fermentation medium, respectively. The HPLC results demonstrated that salinomycin was not detected in the fermentation broth of the ZD11-Δsal-1 mutant (Fig. 5C), which further implies the successful deletion of salinomycin BGC. Deletion of 200 kb Non-Essential Chromosomal Region in S. albus ZD11 Large-scale genome reduction can not only decrease metabolic burden on host cell, but can also further develop simplified and versatile chassis for NPs production. Therefore, development of efficient large fragments deletion methods is of great importance. In this part, the essential regions (600,000-1,139,003 bp, and 1,827,705-7,635,294 bp) and non-essential regions (1-600,000 bp, 1,139,004-1,827,704 bp, and 7,635,295-8,317,371 bp) were predicted through whole-genome alignment (Fig. 6A), and a 200 kb non-essential chromosomal region of S. albus ZD11 (91,690-291,933 bp), which containg 150 predicted open reading frames, two BGCs, five ISs and six GIs, were selected as the deleting target (Fig. 6A), to further examine the applicability of this markerless deletion system. After the conjugation and non-selective growth, 92% of the colonies among six plates appeared to be blue (single-crossover mutants), the rest 8% colonies exhibited to be white (the original color of S. albus ZD11). Eight white colonies were randomly seletcted and verified by PCR, and six of them were confirmed as the double-crossover mutants (Figs. 6B-6C). It was shown that deletion of the 200 kb region resulted in significant reduction of cell growth and salinomycin production (Figs. 6D-6E). According to the RNA-seq data of WT S.albus ZD11, although the overwhelming majority of genes located in this region were low expressed (Fig. 6F), 22 genes exhibited exceptionally higher expression levels (FPKM >100). The function of seven of them were unknown and the others were mainly responsible for secondary metabolism. Specifically, the expression level of DUI_70-0189, which encoding ABC-type Fe3+-siderophore transporter substrate-binding protein, was particularly high (The FPKM value is 1955). Previous studies suggested that iron are required for the vast majority of bacteria to survive, and siderophore is vital for bacteria to uptake iron from the environment [29]. Based on this, we speculate that the deletion of DUI_70-0189 might be one of the causes for the reduction of cell growth and salinomycin production.