3. Results 3.1. Swimming Reduced Lee’s Index and Body Weight of HFD-Induced Obese Mice In order to examine the effect of HFD on physical development and body weight, we regularly measured the body weights and the trunk length from the nose to the anus of the mice in each group once every two weeks to calculate Lee’s index (Figure 2A). Compared with the normal control (NC) group, the mice from the HFD group revealed extremely significant differences in Lee’s index (p < 0.001) from 6 to 12 weeks and extremely significant differences in body weight from 4 to 20 weeks (p < 0.001), indicating that HFD can rapidly promote the body development of the mice. After obesity modeling for 12 weeks, the obese mice were divided into the obesity-exercise (OE) group and the obesity-control (OC) group. Compared with the OC group, the body weights of the mice from the OE group showed a significant decrease after a swimming intervention for 8 weeks (p < 0.05) (Figure 2B). Therefore, 12 weeks of HFD administration significantly induced the development of obesity in young mice, while the 8-week swimming intervention reduced the body weights of the obese mice. 3.2. Swimming Intervention Enhanced Learning and Memory Capacity of Obese Mice Usually, learning and memory functions reveal the rapid development during the adolescent period, and the long-term consumption of high-fat diets has adverse effects on the brain and nervous system [14]. Therefore, we used a novel object recognition test to evaluate the changes in learning and memory capacity of obese mice (Figure 2A,B). Compared with the NC group, the recognition capability to novel objects of the mice from the OC and OE groups was significantly lower, indicating that a high-fat diet could suppress the learning and memory capacity of the mice (p < 0.05). In contrast, after a swimming intervention for 8 weeks, the learning and memory capacity of the mice from the OE group was significantly higher than that in the OC group (p < 0.05) (Figure 2C). These results suggest that the long-term consumption of a high-fat diet during the adolescent period can lead to the impaired learning and memory capacity of the mice, while a swimming intervention can be beneficial to the improvement or rescuing of the declined learning and memory capacity of the obese mice. 3.3. Swimming Suppressed Hippocampal Neuronal Degeneration of Obese Mice Long-term consumption of a high-fat diet may lead to the damage and functional decline of hippocampal neurons [15]. In order to further understand the effect of obesity on hippocampal neurons, we conducted HE, Nissl, and NeuN staining to evaluate the morphological and pathological changes of the hippocampal neurons of the obese mice upon the swimming intervention (Figure 3A–C). Compared with the NC group, the neuronal damage, disordered and sparse neuron arrangement, and decreased number of mature neurons in the mice from the OC group were observed. In contrast, the swimming intervention rescued these obesity-induced impairments or abnormal changes of hippocampal neurons, or it suppressed the hippocampal neuronal degeneration of the obese mice, as shown in the deep and compact neuronal borders and nuclei with Nissl staining (Figure 3B) and more mature neurons under the same background intensity (Figure 3D). These results suggest that obesity can impair the maturation process and the corresponding functions of neurons, while a swimming intervention can ameliorate hippocampal neuronal damage and stimulate the maturation of neurons. 3.4. Swimming Suppressed Hippocampal Neuroinflammation of Obese Mice Obesity can trigger chronic inflammation, and same changes can be observed in the nervous system [16]. In order to determine the level of inflammation in hippocampal tissue under the status of obesity, we evaluated inflammation-related proteins by Western blot (Figure 4A). Compared with the NC group, the expression of IL-6 and TNF-α in hippocampal tissues of the mice from the OC group showed a significant increase (p < 0.05); on the contrary, swimming intervention reversed the obesity-induced increase of IL-6 and TNF-α (p < 0.05; p < 0.01) (Figure 4B,C). The immunofluorescence results showed that the obviously higher expression of NF-κB p65 in the hippocampal tissues of mice from the OC and OE groups was observed when compared with the NC group; in contrast, swimming intervention down-regulated the expression of NF-κB p65 in hippocampal tissues in comparison with the OC group (Figure 4D), indicating that the swimming intervention has an obviously inhibitory effect on neuroinflammation, thereby executing the suppression of the neuroinflammation-induced reduction of learning and memory capacity. 3.5. Swimming Activated Hippocampal Insulin Signaling in Obese Mice Long-term obesity may lead to inflammation in the body, thus inducing insulin resistance and impairing learning and memory functions [17]. To further explore the changes in inflammation and insulin-related signaling in hippocampal tissues of obese mice, Western blotting was used to evaluate the expression of the proteins associated with inflammation and the insulin signal pathway (Figure 5A). Compared with the NC group, p-JNK/JNK and p-IRS-1ser307/IRS-1 ratios in hippocampal tissues of the mice from the OC group revealed a significant increase (p < 0.05); in contrast, p-PI3K/PI3K and p-Aktser473/Akt ratios exhibited an obvious decrease (p < 0.05), suggesting that a high-fat diet contributes to inflammation-induced insulin resistance. On the other hand, the swimming intervention suppressed the increase of p-JNK/JNK and p-IRS-1ser307/IRS-1 ratios (p < 0.05) and the reduction of p-PI3K/PI3K and p-Aktser473/Akt ratios (p < 0.05, p < 0.01) (Figure 5B–D), thereby stimulating the activation of the insulin signal pathway. These results suggest that elevated levels of inflammation induced by long-term obesity can lead to insulin resistance in the hippocampal tissue, while a swimming intervention can attenuate inflammation-induced insulin resistance. 3.6. Swimming Up-Regulated The Proteins Associated with Neurotrophic Factors and Synaptic Plasticity in the Hippocampal Tissue of Obese Mice The reduction of neurotrophic factors and synaptic plasticity in hippocampal tissues of the mice with obesity may be the inducers for poor learning and memory capacity [18]. To understand the effects of neurotrophic factors on the regeneration of hippocampal neurons in an obese state, we conducted the evaluation of the corresponding protein expression associated with neurotrophic factors and synaptic plasticity in the hippocampal tissue of the mice through Western blot. The expression of PGC-1α, BDNF, and PSD95 in the hippocampal tissues of the mice from the OC group revealed a significant decrease when compared with the NC group (Figure 6A–D) (p < 0.05, p < 0.01), while a swimming intervention could rescue the down-regulation of these proteins (p < 0.05, p < 0.01). Therefore, a swimming intervention is beneficial to the rescuing of down-regulated PGC-1α, BDNF, and PSD95 in hippocampal tissues of the mice caused by the long-term consumption of a high-fat diet, thereby enhancing neurotrophic factors and synaptic plasticity. 3.7. Swimming Inhibited Hippocampal Neuronal Apoptosis in Obese Mice A high-fat diet can induce the oxidative stress for stimulating apoptosis of the hippocampal neurons in mice, thereby triggering a reduced learning and memory capacity [19]. To further explore the effect of a long-term high-fat diet on apoptosis of the hippocampal neurons in obese mice, we examined the expression of anti-apoptotic and apoptotic proteins. Compared with the NC group, a significant decrease in Bcl-2 and an increase in Bax in hippocampal tissues of the mice from the OC group were observed (p < 0.05); on the contrary, a swimming intervention could up-regulate Bcl-2 and down-regulate Bax to execute the suppression of hippocampal neuronal apoptosis (Figure 7A–C). Although Bax did not appear to be significantly different between the OC and OE groups, the expression of Bax in the OE group showed a downward trend when compared to the OC group, and it could significantly reverse the Bcl-2/Bax ratio to suppress apoptosis of the hippocampal neurons in obese mice (Figure 7D) (p < 0.05). These results suggest that the long-term consumption of a high-fat diet may trigger apoptosis of the hippocampal neurons, and swimming can rescue this phenomenon to some extent.