RESULTS Identification of an orphan SAH in Xanthomonas. In the Xanthomonas model organism X. campestris pv. campestris 8004, we identified a single-domain open reading frame (XC_RS15930, designated XccSAH hereafter) homologous to the hydrolase domain of the bifunctional synthetase hydrolase SpoT (Table 2). Compared to Mesh1 in metazoans (28, 32), XccSAH belongs to the phylogenetically distinct sister group known as Mesh1-L (16). Unlike Mesh1, XccSAH does not have a well-defined nicotinamide ribose interaction motif, which has been proposed to allow NADPH hydrolysis (32) (Fig. 1B). In general, XccSAH contains key domain architectures of an alarmone hydrolase, with conserved residues that are critical for nucleotide base coordination, metal coordination, and nucleophilic attack of the 3′-phosphates (Fig. 1B, HD1-6) (42). These features suggest that XccSAH is likely a functional alarmone hydrolase. Proteins exhibiting homology with the (p)ppGpp hydrolase domains of RelA and SpoT in X. campestris pv. campestris 8004 Query sequence Gene ID (NCBI) Sequence identity (%) Function annotation P value. RelA hydrolase domain XC_RS05900 (relA) 100 Bifunctional (p)ppGpp 1.00E−97. XC_RS04795 (spoT) 36.43 Synthetase/guanosine-3′,5′-bis(diphosphate) 3.00E−10. XC_RS10860 35.85 β-N-acetylglucosaminidase 0.53. XC_RS21410 32.26 ATP-dependent DNA helicase Rep 0.92. XC_RS04970 44.12 Assimilatory sulfite reductase (NADPH) 4.9. XC_RS00080 33.87 Hypothetical protein 6.8. XC_RS00850 28.36 Aminotransferase 7.3. SpoT hydrolase domain XC_RS04795 (spoT) 100 Synthetase/guanosine-3′,5′-bis(diphosphate) 6.00E−98. XC_RS15930 (sah) 30.53 HD domain-containing protein 1.00E−12. XC_RS05900 (relA) 36.43 Bifunctional (p)ppGpp 9.00E−11. XC_RS06855 26.15 OsmC family peroxiredoxin 2.5. XC_RS09145 32.43 GGDEF-domain containing protein 2.6. XC_RS13715 38.71 Methionine synthase 6.9. XC_RS18395 23.64 Cystathionine beta-synthase 8. XccSAH hydrolyzes multiple alarmones and NADPH with different efficiencies. To examine the biochemical properties of XccSAH, we recombinantly expressed and purified XccSAH from Escherichia coli, performed in vitro enzymatic assays by incubating XccSAH with radiolabeled alarmones, and monitored the products of the reaction using thin-layer chromatography (TLC) (Fig. 2A to E). For comparison, the bifunctional RSH enzyme Rel (historically called RelA) (17, 43) from the soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis, which has (p)ppGpp hydrolysis activity, and its hydrolase-defective variant RelR44Q were used as controls. Similar to B. subtilis Rel, XccSAH efficiently hydrolyzed ppGpp and pppGpp to GDP and GTP, respectively (Fig. 2A and B) and required manganese (Mn2+) for its activity (Fig. 2C). This metal selectivity was consistent with other previously reported (p)ppGpp hydrolases (29, 44). We found that B. subtilis Rel could also hydrolyze pGpp to GMP (Fig. 2D) but had no detectable pppApp hydrolysis activity (Fig. 2E). In contrast, XccSAH hydrolyzed all alarmones tested, including pGpp and pppApp, to GMP and ATP, respectively (Fig. 2D and E). For pppApp hydrolysis, the additional spot under ATP is 32P-labeled pyrophosphate, since the pppApp was labeled with both 5′-γ-32P and 3′-β-32P (Fig. 2E). Overall, our results indicated that XccSAH has an expanded substrate spectrum compared to long RSH enzymes. FIG 2XccSAH hydrolyzes (p)ppGpp, pGpp, and pppApp in vitro. (A and B) TLC analysis of (p)ppGpp hydrolysis by B. subtilis Rel (B. subtilis bifunctional synthetase-hydrolase Rel), B. subtilis RelR44Q (hydrolase-defective variant of B. subtilis Rel), or XccSAH. Hydrolysis reactions were carried out at 37°C in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM MnCl2, 32P-radiolabeled nucleotides {[5′-α-32P](pp)pGpp or [5′-γ-32P, 3′-β-32P]pppApp}, and 240 nM purified enzymes. Samples were quenched with 2 M formic acid at different times, as indicated. (C) TLC analysis of pppGpp hydrolysis by XccSAH using either 1 mM MnCl2 or 10 mM MgCl2 or both metals. (D and E) TLC analysis of pGpp (D) or pppApp (E) hydrolysis by XccSAH. PPi (inorganic pyrophosphate) is released from the cleavage of 3′-β-32P label from [5′-γ-32P, 3′-β-32P]pppApp. (F to I) Hydrolysis kinetics of pGpp (F), ppGpp (G), pppGpp (H), and pppApp (I) by XccSAH. Hydrolysis reactions were carried out at 37°C in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM MnCl2, 32P-radiolabeled nucleotides, and 25 nM (for pppApp) or 50 nM (for other nucleotides) XccSAH. Samples were quenched with 2 M formic acid at different times as indicated, followed by TLC analysis and quantitation. Data were fitted by nonlinear regression to the Michaelis-Menten equation. Error bars indicate standard deviations from three independent experiments. XccSAH hydrolyzes (p)ppGpp, pGpp, and pppApp in vitro. (A and B) TLC analysis of (p)ppGpp hydrolysis by B. subtilis Rel (B. subtilis bifunctional synthetase-hydrolase Rel), B. subtilis RelR44Q (hydrolase-defective variant of B. subtilis Rel), or XccSAH. Hydrolysis reactions were carried out at 37°C in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM MnCl2, 32P-radiolabeled nucleotides {[5′-α-32P](pp)pGpp or [5′-γ-32P, 3′-β-32P]pppApp}, and 240 nM purified enzymes. Samples were quenched with 2 M formic acid at different times, as indicated. (C) TLC analysis of pppGpp hydrolysis by XccSAH using either 1 mM MnCl2 or 10 mM MgCl2 or both metals. (D and E) TLC analysis of pGpp (D) or pppApp (E) hydrolysis by XccSAH. PPi (inorganic pyrophosphate) is released from the cleavage of 3′-β-32P label from [5′-γ-32P, 3′-β-32P]pppApp. (F to I) Hydrolysis kinetics of pGpp (F), ppGpp (G), pppGpp (H), and pppApp (I) by XccSAH. Hydrolysis reactions were carried out at 37°C in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM MnCl2, 32P-radiolabeled nucleotides, and 25 nM (for pppApp) or 50 nM (for other nucleotides) XccSAH. Samples were quenched with 2 M formic acid at different times as indicated, followed by TLC analysis and quantitation. Data were fitted by nonlinear regression to the Michaelis-Menten equation. Error bars indicate standard deviations from three independent experiments. We next studied the enzyme kinetics of XccSAH on the hydrolysis of pGpp, ppGpp, pppGpp, and pppApp using Michaelis-Menten kinetics (Fig. 2F to I and Table 3). Among the four substrates, XccSAH hydrolyzed pppApp most efficiently, with a kcat of 48.75 ± 2.99 s−1 (mean ± standard deviation) and kcat/Km ratio (catalytic efficiency) of (10.67 ± 0.75) × 105 s−1 M−1 (Table 3). pppGpp and ppGpp hydrolysis was ~50% less efficient than pppApp, with kcat/Km ratios of (5.00 ± 0.82) × 105 s−1 M−1 for ppGpp and (4.93 ± 0.25) × 105 s−1 M−1 for pppGpp (Table 3). Although XccSAH had higher affinities to pppGpp, ppGpp, and pGpp than pppApp (Km values of 29.14 ± 4.41 μM, 14.13 ± 2.02 μM, 19.73 ± 4.75 μM, and 45.82 ± 3.87 μM, respectively), the rate of hydrolysis was faster for pppApp, followed by pppGpp, ppGpp, and pGpp in decreasing order (kcat of 48.75 ± 2.99 s−1,14.30 ± 1.45 s−1, 6.99 ± 0.15 s−1, and 1.63 ± 0.07 s−1, respectively) (Fig. 2F to I, Table 3). These findings suggest that the nucleotide hydrolysis efficiency of XccSAH is positively associated with the number of 5′-phosphates of the nucleotide [e.g., (p)ppGpp > pGpp] and to some extent the identity of the nucleobase (e.g., A > G). Kinetics of alarmone and cofactor hydrolysis by XccSAHa Protein Substrate Vmax (μM/min) Km (μM) kcat (s−1) kcat/Km (s−1 M−1). Alarmone pGpp 4.89 ± 0.22 19.73 ± 4.75 1.63 ± 0.07 (0.86 ± 0.18) × 105. ppGpp 20.96 ± 0.44 14.13 ± 2.02 6.99 ± 0.15 (5.00 ± 0.82) × 105. pppGpp 42.89 ± 4.36 29.14 ± 4.41 14.30 ± 1.45 (4.93 ± 0.25) × 105. pppApp 73.12 ± 4.49 45.82 ± 3.87 48.75 ± 2.99 (10.67 ± 0.75) × 105. Cofactor NADPH 2.88 ± 0.26 132.2 ± 39.09 0.048 ± 0.004 (3.63 ± 0.20) × 102. Calculations for SAH are based on data presented in Fig. 2 and 3. Vmax and Km were calculated by nonlinear regression according to the Michaelis-Menten equation. Alarmone hydrolysis was measured from hydrolysis of 32P-labeled alarmones, while NADPH hydrolysis was measured from inorganic phosphate release using a malachite green assay. XccSAH was used at 25 nM for pppApp, 50 nM for (pp)pGpp, and 1 μM for NAPDH. Each value represents the mean and standard deviation from three independent experiments. In addition to the alarmones, we tested whether XccSAH hydrolyzes NADPH (32), the substrate of the metazoan SAH Mesh1 (28). Since XccSAH lacks a known nicotinamide riboside interaction (NR) motif (Fig. 1B), we were unsure whether XccSAH would be able to hydrolyze NADPH. Therefore, we incubated NADPH with or without XccSAH in vitro, followed by chemical validation of the product in the reaction mix by using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Interestingly, we detected significant (~80%) hydrolysis of NADPH to NADH in the presence of XccSAH, while no NADH generation was detected in the enzyme-free control (Fig. 3A and B). This finding demonstrated that XccSAH is also an NADPH phosphatase. Next, we measured the catalytic parameters of XccSAH on NADPH hydrolysis by monitoring inorganic phosphate release in a malachite green assay (Fig. 3C and D). XccSAH hydrolyzed NADPH with a Km of 132 ± 39.1 μM and catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) of (3.63 ± 0.30) × 102 s−1 M−1 (Fig. 3E). This catalytic efficiency was ~40-fold lower than that reported for Mesh1 (32), in agreement with the lack of an optimized NR motif. Together, these results indicate that XccSAH is a promiscuous enzyme which can hydrolyze different alarmones and NADPH. FIG 3XccSAH is an NADPH phosphatase in vitro. (A and B) XccSAH dephosphorylates NADPH in vitro. Reaction was carried out at 37°C in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 1 mM MnCl2, and 100 μM NADPH with or without 1 μM XccSAH for 60 min. Samples were quenched with 0.5 M formic acid and subjected to LC-MS validation and quantitation of NADPH (A) and NADH (B). (C) Detection of inorganic free phosphate released from NADPH dephosphorylation by XccSAH. NADPH hydrolysis reaction was carried out at 37°C in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 1 mM MnCl2, 1 mM NADPH, and different concentrations of XccSAH. A 0.5 μM concentration of C. elegans Mesh1 (Ce Mesh1) was used as a positive control. Reaction aliquots were quenched with 0.5 M formic acid at different times as indicated and subjected to malachite green assay for free phosphate quantitation. The formation of malachite green-phosphate complex was proportional to the release of free phosphate from NADPH dephosphorylation. (D and E) Kinetics of NADPH hydrolysis by XccSAH. (D) Hydrolysis reaction was carried out as above with 1 μM XccSAH and different concentrations of NADPH. Rate of phosphate release was measured using a malachite green assay. (E) Hydrolysis kinetics of NADPH by XccSAH from the data in panel D. Data were fitted by nonlinear regression to the Michaelis-Menten equation. Error bars indicate standard deviations from three independent experiments. P values were determined using Student's t test. XccSAH is an NADPH phosphatase in vitro. (A and B) XccSAH dephosphorylates NADPH in vitro. Reaction was carried out at 37°C in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 1 mM MnCl2, and 100 μM NADPH with or without 1 μM XccSAH for 60 min. Samples were quenched with 0.5 M formic acid and subjected to LC-MS validation and quantitation of NADPH (A) and NADH (B). (C) Detection of inorganic free phosphate released from NADPH dephosphorylation by XccSAH. NADPH hydrolysis reaction was carried out at 37°C in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 1 mM MnCl2, 1 mM NADPH, and different concentrations of XccSAH. A 0.5 μM concentration of C. elegans Mesh1 (Ce Mesh1) was used as a positive control. Reaction aliquots were quenched with 0.5 M formic acid at different times as indicated and subjected to malachite green assay for free phosphate quantitation. The formation of malachite green-phosphate complex was proportional to the release of free phosphate from NADPH dephosphorylation. (D and E) Kinetics of NADPH hydrolysis by XccSAH. (D) Hydrolysis reaction was carried out as above with 1 μM XccSAH and different concentrations of NADPH. Rate of phosphate release was measured using a malachite green assay. (E) Hydrolysis kinetics of NADPH by XccSAH from the data in panel D. Data were fitted by nonlinear regression to the Michaelis-Menten equation. Error bars indicate standard deviations from three independent experiments. P values were determined using Student's t test. XccSAH reduces pGpp, ppGpp, pppGpp, and NADPH levels in X. campestris pv. campestris during starvation. Since XccSAH can hydrolyze different alarmones and NADPH in vitro, next we studied whether it affects their levels in vivo. The guanylate alarmones pppGpp and ppGpp are induced by amino acid starvation in a variety of bacterial species (3). In the Gram-positive soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis, pGpp also accumulates to high levels during amino acid starvation through hydrolysis of (p)ppGpp (12). We measured the levels of pGpp, ppGpp, pppGpp, and NADPH using LC-MS (25) in wild-type X. campestris pv. campestris, Δsah, and Δsah::Psah complementation strains before and after treatment with a nonfunctional serine analog, serine hydroxamate (SHX), which mimics amino acid starvation in bacteria. In wild-type X. campestris pv. campestris, we detected increases of pGpp, ppGpp, pppGpp, and NADPH upon 30 min of SHX treatment (Fig. 4A to D), while no (p)ppApp was detected. The presence of pGpp suggests that X. campestris pv. campestris RSHs may be able to produce pGpp, as recently reported in Clostridiodes difficile (19), or that it contains Nudix hydrolases that can convert (p)ppGpp to pGpp, similar to NahA in B. subtilis (12). Importantly, the Δsah mutant showed elevation of pGpp (Fig. 4A), ppGpp (Fig. 4B), pppGpp (Fig. 4C), and NADPH (Fig. 4D) compared to the wild type (WT) or the Δsah::Psah complemented strain. These results support the hypothesis that XccSAH can hydrolyze both alarmone and NADPH in X. campestris pv. campestris cells during starvation. FIG 4XccSAH reduces (pp)pGpp and NADPH levels in X. campestris pv. campestris during amino acid starvation. Levels of pGpp (A), ppGpp (B), pppGpp (C), and NADPH (D) in X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, and Δsah::Psah strains before and after amino acid starvation. Cultures were harvested before (UT) and after 30 min serine hydroxamate (SHX) treatment. Alarmones and NADPH were quantitated from extracted cellular metabolites using LC-MS. Normalized ion count represents LC-MS ion count per OD600 per unit volume of the culture. Error bars indicate standard errors from two independent experiments. P values were determined using Student's t test. XccSAH reduces (pp)pGpp and NADPH levels in X. campestris pv. campestris during amino acid starvation. Levels of pGpp (A), ppGpp (B), pppGpp (C), and NADPH (D) in X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, and Δsah::Psah strains before and after amino acid starvation. Cultures were harvested before (UT) and after 30 min serine hydroxamate (SHX) treatment. Alarmones and NADPH were quantitated from extracted cellular metabolites using LC-MS. Normalized ion count represents LC-MS ion count per OD600 per unit volume of the culture. Error bars indicate standard errors from two independent experiments. P values were determined using Student's t test. XccSAH has no detectable effect on plant pathogenesis, biofilm formation, or survival in soil. Since X. campestris pv. campestris is a plant pathogen, we tested whether XccSAH was associated with pathogenicity in plants by infecting radish leaves with X. campestris pv. campestris wild type or Δsah mutant (Fig. 5A and B). No detectable differences were observed for the visual symptoms (Fig. 5A) or bacterial titer postinfection (Fig. 5B) in the leaves infected by either wild type or Δsah mutant. Next, we evaluated potential roles of XccSAH on biofilm formation (Fig. 5C and D) and exopolysaccharide (EPS) secretion (Fig. 5E) and found no significant differences. In addition, we monitored the survival of X. campestris pv. campestris wild type and Δsah mutant in a cabbage-inhabited soil over time and found no detectable difference in viability (Fig. 5F). Collectively, the results suggested that XccSAH is dispensable for plant pathogenesis and soil survival in X. campestris pv. campestris. FIG 5XccSAH had an undetectable effect on plant pathogenicity or biofilm formation in X. campestris pv. campestris. (A and B) Leaf infection by X. campestris pv. campestris WT and Δsah. (A) Visual symptoms of disease on radish (Raphanus sativus L. cv. Japan 501) leaves inoculated with X. campestris pv. campestris suspensions at 7 dpi. N indicates the negative control (0.85% NaCl). Six individual seedlings were used for each experiment, and the entire experiment was conducted twice. (B) Bacterial titers recovered from inoculated radish leaves at 7 dpi. (C to E) Biofilm formation of X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, and Δsah::Psah. (C) Biofilm formation of the X. campestris pv. campestris strains on glass tubes. The glass-bound biofilm was stained with crystal violet. (D) Biofilm quantitated from data in panel C after dissolving in absolute ethanol. (E) Exopolysaccharide (EPS) secretion of the X. campestris pv. campestris strains after 4 days of incubation on LBA containing 2% sucrose. (F) Survival of X. campestris pv. campestris WT and Δsah in soil planted with Chinese cabbage. Error bars indicate standard deviations from three independent experiments. P values were determined using Student's t test. XccSAH had an undetectable effect on plant pathogenicity or biofilm formation in X. campestris pv. campestris. (A and B) Leaf infection by X. campestris pv. campestris WT and Δsah. (A) Visual symptoms of disease on radish (Raphanus sativus L. cv. Japan 501) leaves inoculated with X. campestris pv. campestris suspensions at 7 dpi. N indicates the negative control (0.85% NaCl). Six individual seedlings were used for each experiment, and the entire experiment was conducted twice. (B) Bacterial titers recovered from inoculated radish leaves at 7 dpi. (C to E) Biofilm formation of X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, and Δsah::Psah. (C) Biofilm formation of the X. campestris pv. campestris strains on glass tubes. The glass-bound biofilm was stained with crystal violet. (D) Biofilm quantitated from data in panel C after dissolving in absolute ethanol. (E) Exopolysaccharide (EPS) secretion of the X. campestris pv. campestris strains after 4 days of incubation on LBA containing 2% sucrose. (F) Survival of X. campestris pv. campestris WT and Δsah in soil planted with Chinese cabbage. Error bars indicate standard deviations from three independent experiments. P values were determined using Student's t test. XccSAH contributes to survival against competing bacteria and growth in defined media supplemented with amino acids. As XccSAH hydrolyzes pppApp most efficiently, we speculated that it may promote competitive fitness of X. campestris pv. campestris against (p)ppApp synthesis by the interbacterial toxin Tas1 from Pseudomonas during competition (29). To test this, we measured the survival of X. campestris pv. campestris cocultured with tas1-containing Pseudomonas ADAK18, which is a soil bacterium (45) (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material) that shares similar habitat as X. campestris pv. campestris, or Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA01, which does not carry Tas1 (14). In both cases, coculture with Pseudomonas led to a strong reduction in the number of viable X. campestris pv. campestris cells down to 1% to 10%, suggesting that Pseudomonas can effectively kill X. campestris pv. campestris cells. X. campestris pv. campestris cells lacking sah displayed ~40 to 50% reduced survival compared to wild type or the complementation strains (Fig. 6A and B), suggesting that XccSAH promotes survival against competition with Pseudomonas with or without the Tas1 toxin. FIG 6XccSAH contribute to X. campestris pv. campestris survival against bacterial competitors, as well as growth in defined media supplemented with amino acids. (A and B) XccSAH contributes to survival against Pseudomonas. X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, or Δsah::Psah cultures were mixed with cultures of Pseudomonas ADAK18 (Tas1-carrying strain) (A) or Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA01 (strain without Tas1) (B) and patched on LB agar. Bacteria on patches were recovered before and after 24 h of incubation. Survival of X. campestris pv. campestris strains was measured by plating on X. campestris pv. campestris-selective plates followed by colony counting. (C and D) XccSAH contributes to growth in defined media supplemented with amino acids. X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, or Δsah::Psah cells were measured for their doubling times in either LB (C) or defined media supplemented with amino acids (D). Error bars indicate standard errors from three independent experiments. P values were determined using Student's t test. XccSAH contribute to X. campestris pv. campestris survival against bacterial competitors, as well as growth in defined media supplemented with amino acids. (A and B) XccSAH contributes to survival against Pseudomonas. X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, or Δsah::Psah cultures were mixed with cultures of Pseudomonas ADAK18 (Tas1-carrying strain) (A) or Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA01 (strain without Tas1) (B) and patched on LB agar. Bacteria on patches were recovered before and after 24 h of incubation. Survival of X. campestris pv. campestris strains was measured by plating on X. campestris pv. campestris-selective plates followed by colony counting. (C and D) XccSAH contributes to growth in defined media supplemented with amino acids. X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, or Δsah::Psah cells were measured for their doubling times in either LB (C) or defined media supplemented with amino acids (D). Error bars indicate standard errors from three independent experiments. P values were determined using Student's t test. Homology of Tas1 in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 and Pseudomonas ADAK18. Tas1 in PA14 and ADAK8 are highly similar, with an identity of 74.38% (Clustal Omega). The red triangles indicate key catalytic residues of Tas1 in PA14 (14). Download FIG S1, TIF file, 1.8 MB. Finally, we quantified the potential impact of sah during steady-state planktonic growth. X. campestris pv. campestris lacking sah grew similarly to wild-type cells in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium (Fig. 6C) but displayed compromised growth in morpholinopropanesulfonic acid (MOPS) defined medium supplemented with amino acids, with an ≈10% reduction in growth rate (Fig. 6D) and no detectable difference in the optical density/viability ratio (Fig. S2). The growth reduction was complemented by ectopic sah expression (Fig. 6D), suggesting that the defect is dependent on XccSAH. These results suggest that XccSAH modestly promotes growth of X. campestris pv. campestris, which will provide a selective advantage over the long run. Growth reduction of sah mutant is not due to difference in optical densities. X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, or Δsah::Psah cells grown in defined media supplemented with amino acids were measured for their CFU per OD600 unit. Error bars indicate standard errors from three independent experiments. P values were determined using Student’s t test. Download FIG S2, TIF file, 0.8 MB. XccSAH strongly impacts cellular NADH levels in X. campestris pv. campestris during growth in defined media supplemented with amino acids. The modest growth defect we observed in amino acid-supplemented defined media suggests that XccSAH may impact cellular metabolism under conditions where (p)ppGpp alarmones are uninduced. To test this hypothesis, we performed metabolite profiling of wild-type, Δsah, and sah complementation strains in the same media (Fig. 6D) using LC-MS. Comparison of metabolite levels between wild type and Δsah mutants revealed that the levels of most metabolites, including nucleotides and cell wall precursors, were largely similar between the strains (Fig. 7A). In addition, no (pp)pGpp or pppApp was detected in either WT or Δsah, indicating that the alarmones were not induced or were below the detection limit during exponential growth under this condition. However, the level of the NADH cofactor was significantly lower (~10-fold) in the Δsah mutant (Fig. 7B). In addition, the Δsah mutant also displayed a small (~50%) increase in NAD+ compared to wild-type cells (Fig. 7C), while NADPH and NADP+ levels had no significant differences (Fig. 7D and E). The drop in NADH in the Δsah mutant was not due to defects in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, a major source of NADH generation, since the levels of TCA cycle metabolites remained similar or even slightly higher in the mutant (Fig. S3). Instead, the depletion of NADH due to loss of XccSAH corroborated our finding that XccSAH can generate NADH from NADPH in vitro (Fig. 3A and B). Importantly, reintroducing the sah gene to the Δsah mutant restored NADH level back to wild-type levels (Fig. 7A and B). Together, the results suggest that XccSAH contributes to the maintenance of the NADH pool through dephosphorylation of NADPH. FIG 7XccSAH regulates NADH levels in X. campestris pv. campestris during growth in defined media supplemented with amino acids. (A) Heat map of metabolite changes in Δsah or Δsah::Psah strains relative to WT. Cells were grown in defined media supplemented with amino acids and harvested at exponential phase for metabolite extraction and LC-MS analysis. Values shown are mean relative changes of OD600-normalized ion counts (log2). PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; UDP-GlcNAc, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine; UDP-MurNAc, UDP-N-acetylmuramate. (B to E) NADH (B), NAD+ (C), NADPH (D), and NADP+ (E) levels in X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, and Δsah::Psah strains during exponential growth in defined media supplemented with amino acids. Ion counts were normalized to OD600. Error bars indicate standard errors from three independent experiments. P values were determined using Student's t test. XccSAH regulates NADH levels in X. campestris pv. campestris during growth in defined media supplemented with amino acids. (A) Heat map of metabolite changes in Δsah or Δsah::Psah strains relative to WT. Cells were grown in defined media supplemented with amino acids and harvested at exponential phase for metabolite extraction and LC-MS analysis. Values shown are mean relative changes of OD600-normalized ion counts (log2). PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; UDP-GlcNAc, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine; UDP-MurNAc, UDP-N-acetylmuramate. (B to E) NADH (B), NAD+ (C), NADPH (D), and NADP+ (E) levels in X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, and Δsah::Psah strains during exponential growth in defined media supplemented with amino acids. Ion counts were normalized to OD600. Error bars indicate standard errors from three independent experiments. P values were determined using Student's t test. Levels of TCA cycle metabolites in X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, and Δsah::Psah in defined media supplemented with amino acids. Levels of citrate (A), α-ketoglutarate (B), succinyl-CoA (C), succinate (D), malate (E), and oxaloacetate (F) in X. campestris pv. campestris WT, Δsah, and Δsah::Psah strains, as described and shown in Fig. 6A. Cells were grown in defined media supplemented with amino acids and harvested at exponential phase for metabolite extraction and LC-MS analysis. Ion counts were normalized to the OD600. Error bars indicate standard errors from three independent experiments. P values were determined using Student’s t test. Download FIG S3, TIF file, 1.2 MB.