2. Results 2.1. The EntDD14-ABC Transporter System Contains Four Proteins The ABC transporter associated with EntDD14 synthesis was initially described as containing at least three genes corresponding to ddH, ddI, and ddJ genes [25]. Deletion of the ddI gene significantly altered the transport of EntDD14, as the quantity of bacteriocin in the medium was reduced by ~75% [25]. To determine the role of the other components of the EntDD14-ABC transporter system, different mutant strains were constructed, namely the ΔddG, the triple ΔddHIJ, and the quadruple ΔddGHIJ mutant strains, and assessed for their respective antibacterial activity against L. innocua ATCC 33090, used as a sensor and indicator strain. The total antibacterial activity obtained with the WT strain was used as the reference value for 100% of the activity (Figure 1). Thus, the culture from the triple ΔddHIJ or the quadruple ΔddGHIJ mutant strains showed an antibacterial activity of ~25% of the WT, similar to that obtained previously with the ΔddI mutant [25]. The culture of the ΔddG mutant strain exhibited an antibacterial activity of ~33% (Figure 1). From this, it can be concluded that DdG, DdH, DdI, and DdJ form a functional assembly that is involved in up to 75% of EntDd14 enterocin transport. 2.2. The Proteins DdF and DdE Are Essential for the Transport of EntDD14 As described above, the ABC transporter system of EntDD14 in its totality is constituted by the four ddGHIJ genes (Figure 1) as has already been identified for the transport of other bacteriocins [22,27,28]. These results suggest that the ABC transporter system is not the unique system involved in the transport of EntDD14. Therefore, partial or total deletion of the ABC transporter noticeably reduced but did not stop the transport of EntDD14 outside of the bacterial cell (Figure 1). This observation raises the question of what effect the loss of this bacteriocin transport activity could have. If the EntDD14 bacteriocin is not completely excreted into the extracellular medium, logically it must accumulate inside the producing cells where it could have a deleterious effect. Therefore, we assessed the survival of E. faecalis 14 and its isogenic mutant strains after 6 and 24 h of growth in GM17 (Figure 2). After six hours of growth, no survival differences were observed between the WT and different mutant strains (Figure 2). The amount of EntDD14 produced after six hours of growth did not induce any cell toxicity. Nevertheless, after 24 h of growth, we could observe a loss of one log magnitude in in the ΔddE and ΔddF mutants’ survival rate (Figure 2) due to intracellular accumulation of EntDD14, strengthening the previously reported data [26]. The ΔddE and ΔddF mutants do not exert any anti-Listeria activity, in spite of their intact ABC transport system. In these genetic backgrounds, EntDD14 appeared to be trapped in the producing cells, arguing that translocation of this bacteriocin can be performed only in the presence of DdE and DdF proteins. All of these results support the essential role of the DdEF system in the transport of EntDD14. The DdEF system is likely a simple gradient-dependent transporter, which alone is unable to ensure the entire transport of EntDD14 in the WT strain. The ABC transporter composed of DdGHIJ is an active ATP-dependent transporter, boosting the DdEF system to fully expel the bacteriocin outside the cell against a gradient concentration. These independent systems are thought to interact synergistically in the transport of EntDD14 outside of the bacterial cell. 2.3. The ABC Transporter DdGHIJ Is Involved in the Resistance to Extracellular EntDD14 The different constructed mutants, as well as the WT strain, were tested against a pure solution of EntDD14 in order to determine their intrinsic resistance to this extracellularly added bacteriocin. The results obtained allowed us to define three distinct groups, as shown in Figure 3. In the first group, which involves the WT strain, ΔddE and ΔddF mutant strains clearly exhibited the highest MIC values against extracellular EntDD14, with values of up to 120 µg/mL. The second group, which contains ΔddG, ΔddI, ΔddHIJ, and ΔddGHIJ mutants of the ABC transporter system, is characterized by an intermediate resistance, with MIC values against extracellular EntDD14 of 80 µg/mL. Finally, the third group comprising the Δbac mutant, which is deficient in the synthesis of EntDD14 and the indicator strain L. innocua ATCC 33090, is characterized as having the lowest MIC values of 40 µg/mL (Figure 3). To further analyze the interaction between the ABC transporter and the resistance to extracellular EntDD14, we performed growth kinetics in the presence of EntDD14 with a final concentration of 20 or 40 µg/mL. Notably, in the absence of added EntDD14, the growth of ΔddGHIJ was similar to that of the WT (Figure 4A). Remarkably, at 20 µg/mL of EntDD14, the quadruple ΔddGHIJ mutant showed an extended lag phase of five hours compared to the WT (Figure 4B), whereas at 40 µg/mL of EntDD14, the mutant was unable to grow (Figure 4C). These results support the hypothesis of the involvement of the ABC transporter in the detoxification of extracellular EntDD14. The results in Figure 3 show that the strains exhibiting the highest resistance to extracellular amounts of EntDD14 are the WT and the ΔddE and ΔddF mutants. These results are coherent for the WT because all its transport systems that regulate the EntDD14 accumulation levels are compatible with its development; however, this is not the case for the ΔddE and ΔddF mutants. Indeed, these mutants are deficient in DdE or DdF proteins, indicating that the transport system comprising both proteins plays no role in the resistance to the extracellularly localized EntDD14. On the other hand, the resistance threshold of WT, ΔddE, and ΔddF mutants does not differ much from those obtained in mutants related to the ABC transporter (~2-fold) or the Listeria control strain (~3-fold). This can be explained by an unspecific effect of the bacteriocin when applied at a high concentration, causing a detergent-like effect, which has been reported for some cationic peptides [29]. The results in Figure 4 are also consistent with the ABC transport system, which is involved in resistance against EntDD14 by expelling it from the cellular membrane. This is reflected in panel B for which cells are confronted with EntDD14 extracellular concentrations (20 µg/mL) that cause problems in the fitness of the tested strains. Indeed, the WT takes about 10 h to adapt while the ΔddGHIJ mutant takes 5 h more; however, once the adaptation succeeds, the cells grow in almost the same way as in the absence of bacteriocin. In panel C, the EntDD14 extracellular concentrations (40 µg/mL) are beyond what the ΔddGHIJ mutant can tolerate, thus preventing it from growing; even the WT has its lag phase extended to 13 h for its adaptation and commencement of growth. 2.4. Predicted Structures of DdE, DdF, and DdE/DdF Show a Potential Transmembrane Channel Both DdF and DdE have no homologs with known structures in the PDB database. Hence, Alphafold2, with its novel machine learning approach, was used to predict their structures. The best ranking structural model of DdF generated with a good confidence score (pLDDT value 78.3; maximum is 100) has the general aspect of a transmembrane channel with six mostly hydrophobic alpha-helices connecting the two predominantly hydrophilic regions on the extracellular and intracellular sides of the membrane. Viewed from the extracellular side, the helices are arranged in an incomplete circle (Figure 5) indicating that the channel is not complete. The DdE model was predicted to have a lower confidence score (pLDDT value 58.7) and consists of only two helices connecting the two predominantly hydrophilic regions. As both DdF and DdE are both independently required for the transport of EntDD14, we have attempted to model a multimeric complex using various subunit stoichiometries: DdE/DdF; (DdE)2/DdF; (DdE)3/DdF; DdE/(DdF)2; and (DdE)2/(DdF)2. A structural model with the highest confidence score (iptm + ptm value of 0.7; maximum is 1) was obtained for the DdE/DdF complex (Figure 5). In the complex, DdE and DdF hydrophobic helices are arranged in a complete circle, which looks like a functional transmembrane channel in agreement with the previous results stating that these proteins are involved in the exit and entry of EntDD14. Moreover, this formation associating the two proteins, DdE and DdF, also explains the fact that when one of them is missing, the translocation process across the plasma membrane no longer takes place.