RESULTS Streptomyces coelicolor displays kanamycin resistance under iron-replete conditions. During our research on superoxide dismutases (SODs) in S. coelicolor, we fortuitously observed that the activity of iron-containing SOD (SodF) was specifically reduced in the presence of a sublethal level of kanamycin (0.25 μg/mL) (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). Based on the possible link between the growth inhibitory effect of kanamycin and the SodF depletion that is usually caused by reduced iron availability as an iron-sparing response (21), we hypothesized that kanamycin-induced growth inhibition might be attributed to iron starvation. To test for this, we examined whether the bacterial susceptibility to kanamycin could be circumvented simply by iron repletion. As shown in Fig. 1A, the result from a disk diffusion assay showed that the zone of inhibition by kanamycin was significantly reduced by iron supplementation. This was also verified by measuring the growth and determining the MICs of kanamycin in the presence of iron. As shown in Fig. 1B, growth inhibition by kanamycin gradually disappeared as more iron was supplemented in liquid culture, whereas growth was not affected at all by the iron treatment in the absence of kanamycin. The MIC of kanamycin was concomitantly increased with iron treatment in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1C). The intracellular iron levels were increased in proportion to the concentrations of supplied iron (Fig. 1D), as measured by a ferrozine-based spectrophotometric assay. In the presence of kanamycin, the relative growth and MIC values correlated very well with the intracellular iron levels (Fig. 1E). These results led us to conclude that iron treatment promotes kanamycin resistance in S. coelicolor. In contrast to the effect of iron, other transition metals such as cobalt, nickel, manganese, and zinc were unable to induce kanamycin resistance (Fig. S2A and B), suggesting that some iron-specific physiology could obviate the antibiotic effect exerted by kanamycin. FIG 1Iron induces resistance to kanamycin. (A) Disk diffusion assay for kanamycin sensitivity under iron-replete condition. Labels: C, no treatment; K, kanamycin (25 μg); F, FeCl3 (15 μg); KF, kanamycin and iron. (B and C) Growth curves (B) and MIC values (C) in the presence of kanamycin (Km; 0.5 μg/mL) and iron (Fe) at the iron concentrations (μM) indicated in parentheses. Con, no treatment (black circles). (D) Intracellular total iron contents were measured after iron supplementation at the designated concentrations in panels B and C. Iron contents were normalized by dry cell weight (nmole/DCWmg). (E) Correlation between intracellular iron content from panel D and either MIC of kanamycin (red squares) or relative growth (RG; blue circles) from panels B and C. RG (%) was calculated using the OD600 values at 8 h in panel B. R2 values were calculated from linear regression. Iron induces resistance to kanamycin. (A) Disk diffusion assay for kanamycin sensitivity under iron-replete condition. Labels: C, no treatment; K, kanamycin (25 μg); F, FeCl3 (15 μg); KF, kanamycin and iron. (B and C) Growth curves (B) and MIC values (C) in the presence of kanamycin (Km; 0.5 μg/mL) and iron (Fe) at the iron concentrations (μM) indicated in parentheses. Con, no treatment (black circles). (D) Intracellular total iron contents were measured after iron supplementation at the designated concentrations in panels B and C. Iron contents were normalized by dry cell weight (nmole/DCWmg). (E) Correlation between intracellular iron content from panel D and either MIC of kanamycin (red squares) or relative growth (RG; blue circles) from panels B and C. RG (%) was calculated using the OD600 values at 8 h in panel B. R2 values were calculated from linear regression. Kanamycin treatment and superoxide dismutase activity. Native PAGE was performed for activity staining using 20 μg of cell lysates from S. coelicolor that had been treated for the indicated time (0.5, 1, and 2 h) with (+) or without (−) 1 μg/mL kanamycin (Km). The activity bands of Ni-containing (SodN) and Fe-containing (SodF) SODs are indicated on the left. Download FIG S1, PDF file, 0.1 MB. Specificity of iron in promoting kanamycin resistance. (A) Relative growth (%) was calculated using the OD600 values after 8 h of treatment with 0.5 μg/mL kanamycin in the absence or presence of various metals (Fe, FeCl3; Co, CoCl2; Ni, NiSO4; Mn, MnCl2; Zn, ZnCl2) at 250 μM. (B) MIC values of kanamycin in the presence of various metals at the designated concentrations. The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviations, of results from three independent experiments. The P value was indicated from a two-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple-comparison test. Download FIG S2, PDF file, 0.2 MB. Resistance to polymyxin B and other aminoglycosides is also enhanced by iron. Since kanamycin is one of the well-studied ribosome inhibitors (22), we investigated whether iron (250 μM) could restore the ribosome-mediated protein synthesis rate based on [35S]Met incorporation. As shown in Fig. 2A, iron supplementation could alleviate the translational dysfunction caused by kanamycin (0.5 μg/mL). One can postulate that iron may have altered the ribosomes to become more resistant to kanamycin, considering that iron could replace magnesium, an essential cofactor in the ribosome (23). If this was the case, iron enhancement of antibiotic resistance would be observed against other ribosome inhibitors. In order to test this idea, we measured the effect of iron on growth (optical density [OD]) and cell viability (number of CFU) in the presence of chloramphenicol, erythromycin, and tetracycline. Figure 2B shows that iron did not induce resistance against other ribosome inhibitors. Therefore, general alteration of ribosomes by iron to resist translational inhibitors could not be the plausible mechanism behind the iron effect. FIG 2Iron induces resistance to kanamycin and polymyxin B. (A) Translation rate (%) calculated from [S35]Met incorporation under kanamycin only (blue; Km) or kanamycin plus iron (red; Km+Fe). The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviation, of results from three independent experiments. P value is indicated from two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Sidak’s multiple-comparison test. n.s., nonsignificant. (B and C) Relative growth (black circles; left axis) and number of CFU (red squares; right axis) of S. coelicolor cells cultured in the presence of ribosome-targeting antibiotics (B) or other antibiotics (C) at designated concentrations with (AB+Fe,; filled symbols) or without (AB; open symbols) iron are shown. Iron induces resistance to kanamycin and polymyxin B. (A) Translation rate (%) calculated from [S35]Met incorporation under kanamycin only (blue; Km) or kanamycin plus iron (red; Km+Fe). The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviation, of results from three independent experiments. P value is indicated from two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Sidak’s multiple-comparison test. n.s., nonsignificant. (B and C) Relative growth (black circles; left axis) and number of CFU (red squares; right axis) of S. coelicolor cells cultured in the presence of ribosome-targeting antibiotics (B) or other antibiotics (C) at designated concentrations with (AB+Fe,; filled symbols) or without (AB; open symbols) iron are shown. We then examined the effect of iron on the efficacies of other antibiotics that target the cell envelope (polymyxin B), DNA replication (novobiocin), or transcription (rifampin). Interestingly, iron-induced resistance was observed only against polymyxin B (Fig. 2C), which interferes with the membrane integrity of the Gram-negative bacteria and a few Gram-positive bacteria by direct interaction with some negatively charged components of the cell envelope (24). We first ruled out the possibility that kanamycin and polymyxin B could directly affect iron availability by determining the intracellular iron levels and the expression levels of the iron-responsive genes (Fig. S3). A common feature of kanamycin and polymyxin B that distinguishes them from the other antibiotics is that both of them are bactericidal, whereas the others are bacteriostatic (Fig. 2B and C). We then examined whether iron promotes resistance to other bactericidal aminoglycosides, such as gentamicin, streptomycin, and neomycin. The results demonstrated that iron enhanced the resistance to all these aminoglycosides (Fig. S4). Therefore, we propose that iron could induce resistance to bactericidal antibiotics such as aminoglycosides and polymyxin B, regardless of the direct target points of the antibiotics. Antibiotic treatment and intracellular iron status. (A) Intracellular total iron contents were measured before (control) and after treatments with 0.5 μg/mL kanamycin (Km; red) or 8 μg/mL polymyxin B (PMX; blue) for 30 min. Measured values were normalized by dry cell weight (DCWmg). (B) Expression levels of genes for iron regulator (dmdR), DmdR regulon (desA, cchE, sco7400), or iron-containing enzyme (sodF) were measured after treatment with 100 μM dipyridyl (Dip; black), 0.5 μg/mL kanamycin (Km; red), or 8 μg/mL polymyxin B (PMX; blue) for 30 min. Gene expression was quantified by using reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR), and fold induction was calculated relative to the nontreated control. The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviations, of results from three independent experiments. Download FIG S3, PDF file, 0.1 MB. Iron promotes resistance to aminoglycoside drugs. Relative growth (black circles; left axis) and CFUs (red squares; right axis) of S. coelicolor cells cultured in the presence of gentamicin, streptomycin, or neomycin at the designated concentrations with (AB+Fe; filled symbols) or without (AB; open symbols) iron are shown. Download FIG S4, PDF file, 0.1 MB. Iron enhances the respiration of S. coelicolor. As an initial attempt to elucidate the mechanisms by which iron could promote antibiotic resistance, we profiled transcriptome changes by RNA sequencing upon iron supplementation in the presence and absence of antibiotic treatment (Fig. 3). Iron changed significantly more genes in the presence of kanamycin than in its absence. Among the 1,192 genes whose expression was changed significantly by iron in the presence of kanamycin, the expression of 1,048 genes was mostly changed to levels that were similar to the untreated (control) levels. The principal-component analysis (PCA) plot reflects this phenomenon by showing that iron shifts the clustering pattern of the kanamycin-treated transcriptome toward the transcriptome pattern of the no-kanamycin sample (Fig. S5). We therefore further analyzed the 144 genes whose expression level changed by iron treatment in the presence of kanamycin as well as in its absence (Fig. 3A and Table S2). Except for iron transporter genes, those belonging to the functional groups for central carbon metabolism (pgi, gnd, zwf, tal, fumB, and sdh2 operon) and respiration (cydAB and sdh2 operon) were highly enriched in this list (Fig. 3B and C). To examine whether these genes are required for iron-promoted antibiotic resistance, we created deletion strains that lack the gnd-pgi-zwf-tal operon (SCO6658-6663), sdhB2A2C2 operon (SCO0922-0924), or cydAB operon (SCO3945-3946) or an overexpression strain of the fumB gene (SCO5044) driven by the ermE* promoter. When we measured the number of CFU of each strain in the presence of kanamycin, we found that the mutations or overexpression did not compromise the iron effect (Fig. S6). However, the negative results still do not exclude the possibility that these genes contribute to iron-promoted antibiotic resistance, since the effect of single mutations can often be compensated by other alternative genes or pathways. FIG 3Transcriptomic analysis of iron-supplemented S. coelicolor. (A) Venn diagram with the numbers of iron-responsive genes. Iron-responsive genes were selected based on their adjusted P values of less than 0.05. (B) Dot plot for iron-responsive genes based on the gene ontology (GO) terms. The size of the dots represents the counted number of genes in each ontology term, and the color of the dots represents the significance of each ontology enrichment using the P value (−log10
P; from yellow to red). (C) Scatterplot for the 144 genes by kanamycin-stressed (Km/Con) and iron-treated (Km+Fe/Km) conditions. The R2 value was calculated from linear regression. Genes with a difference in fold induction of >5 are marked in red, and those belonging to carbon metabolism and respiration are marked with the gene names. Transcriptomic analysis of iron-supplemented S. coelicolor. (A) Venn diagram with the numbers of iron-responsive genes. Iron-responsive genes were selected based on their adjusted P values of less than 0.05. (B) Dot plot for iron-responsive genes based on the gene ontology (GO) terms. The size of the dots represents the counted number of genes in each ontology term, and the color of the dots represents the significance of each ontology enrichment using the P value (−log10
P; from yellow to red). (C) Scatterplot for the 144 genes by kanamycin-stressed (Km/Con) and iron-treated (Km+Fe/Km) conditions. The R2 value was calculated from linear regression. Genes with a difference in fold induction of >5 are marked in red, and those belonging to carbon metabolism and respiration are marked with the gene names. Principal-component analysis (PCA) of differential expression data sets from S. coelicolor. PCA plot of RNA-seq data sets for the gene expression changes in S. coelicolor cells that were untreated (red; control) or treated with 250 μM FeCl3 (yellow), 0.5 μg/mL kanamycin (green), or 0.5 μg/mL kanamycin plus 250 μM FeCl3 (purple). Each data set consisted of two independent transcriptome data (spot). The PCA was performed by using normalized RNA-seq data of 8,152 genes differentially expressed in at least one pairwise comparison: control versus iron and/or kanamycin treatment. Download FIG S5, PDF file, 0.1 MB. Effect of deletion or overexpression of some metabolic genes on iron-promoted kanamycin resistance. CFU/mL was enumerated by counting viable cells of wild-type, deletion mutant, or overexpression strains after 8 h of culture in the presence of kanamycin (0.5 μg/mL) treatment with (Fe+) or without (none) FeCl3 (250 μM) supplementation. The examined strains are mutants with deletions of SCO4855-4858 (Δsdh complex), SCO0922-0924 (Δsdh2 complex), SCO6658-6663 (Δgnd-tktB operon), and SCO3945-3946 (ΔcydAB) and an overexpression strain of SCO5044 driven by the ermE* promoter (ermE*::fumB). The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviations, of results from three independent experiments. Download FIG S6, PDF file, 0.1 MB. List of 144 genes responsive to iron. Download Table S2, PDF file, 0.1 MB. It was noted that both the cydA and cydB genes encoding two subunits of cytochrome bd oxidase were upregulated upon iron supplementation in kanamycin treatment (Fig. 3C). Cytochrome bd oxidase is an alternative terminal oxidase that is induced by oxygen limitation in S. coelicolor as well as in other bacteria (25, 26). This observation and the previous findings that the toxicity of bactericidal antibiotics is derived from aerobic respiration (27) led us to hypothesize that iron-promoted resistance to the two bactericidal antibiotics may be associated with some alteration in respiration in S. coelicolor. To test this idea, we measured the amount of intracellular NAD+ and NADH and calculated their ratio as an indicator of respiration activity. As shown in Fig. 4A, iron supplementation increased NADH oxidation whereas kanamycin decreased it. Iron could restore the NADH oxidation that was affected by kanamycin up to a level of about 2-fold of the untreated control level. This result is consistent with the aforementioned data on the growth-stimulating effect of iron in the presence of kanamycin (Fig. 1B and 2B). The intracellular ATP levels were not significantly changed by iron and/or kanamycin treatment (Fig. S7). There is a possibility that the proton motive force or ATP generated by iron-promoted NADH oxidation could have been consumed by other cellular processes such as membrane transport. Overall, our data suggest that the growth-stimulatory effect of iron in the presence of bactericidal antibiotics seems to result from altered respiration. FIG 4Iron-induced respiration under hypoxic condition. (A) Quantification of the intracellular amount of NAD and NADH after treatment with 0.5 μg/mL kanamycin (Km) and/or 250 μM iron (Fe) for 30 min. Measurements were normalized by dry cell weight (DCWmg). (B) Growth (OD600) of S. coelicolor with (Fe; red) or without (−; black) iron treatment under hypoxic conditions in an anaerobic chamber. Arrowheads indicate the time point (120 min) of NAD/NADH measurement in panel C. (C) Quantification of the intracellular ratio of NAD to NADH during the microaerophilic growth in panel B. The amounts of NAD and NADH were measured, and the ratio was normalized by dry cell weight (DCWmg). The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviations, of results from three independent experiments. The P value is indicated from one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple-comparison test (A) and a two-tailed t test (C). n.s., nonsignificant. Iron-induced respiration under hypoxic condition. (A) Quantification of the intracellular amount of NAD and NADH after treatment with 0.5 μg/mL kanamycin (Km) and/or 250 μM iron (Fe) for 30 min. Measurements were normalized by dry cell weight (DCWmg). (B) Growth (OD600) of S. coelicolor with (Fe; red) or without (−; black) iron treatment under hypoxic conditions in an anaerobic chamber. Arrowheads indicate the time point (120 min) of NAD/NADH measurement in panel C. (C) Quantification of the intracellular ratio of NAD to NADH during the microaerophilic growth in panel B. The amounts of NAD and NADH were measured, and the ratio was normalized by dry cell weight (DCWmg). The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviations, of results from three independent experiments. The P value is indicated from one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple-comparison test (A) and a two-tailed t test (C). n.s., nonsignificant. Levels of ATP under kanamycin and iron treatments. Quantification of the intracellular amount of ATP after treatments with 0.5 μg/mL kanamycin (Km) and/or 250 μM iron (Fe) for 30 min. Measurements were normalized by dry cell weight (DCWmg). The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviations, of results from three independent experiments. Download FIG S7, PDF file, 0.09 MB. Considering the function of CydAB as an alternative oxidase under oxygen-limiting conditions and its upregulation upon iron treatment, it can be predicted that iron can stimulate bacterial growth under oxygen-limiting conditions. To test this idea, we monitored the growth of S. coelicolor, known to be a strictly aerobic organism, in an anaerobic chamber in the presence or absence of iron. As shown in Fig. 4B, the growth of S. coelicolor was severely compromised under this condition, as expected. However, its growth was significantly stimulated by iron supplementation in the anaerobic chamber. Iron supplementation increased NADH oxidation under anaerobic conditions, as shown in Fig. 4C. Accumulation of NADH to a level equivalent to that of NAD+ (i.e., NAD+/NADH ratio of ∼1.0) appeared to coincide with the growth defect of S. coelicolor under anaerobic conditions. Iron enhanced this ratio to ∼4.0. These observations support the idea that iron alters respiration to a mode(s) that is less dependent on oxygen and hence enhances bacterial resistance to bactericidal antibiotics, whose efficacy is closely linked to oxygen-dependent respiration (27). KCN-mediated respiration impairment reduces but not abolishes iron-promoted antibiotic resistance. To further verify the contribution of altered respiration to iron-promoted antibiotic resistance, we examined the effect of potassium cyanide (KCN), a well-known inhibitor of terminal oxidases in aerobic respiration (28). As shown in Fig. 5A, KCN at its sublethal concentration (0.5 mM) reduced respiration in all samples by about 2-fold. However, even in the presence of KCN, iron still promoted respiration significantly, suggesting the involvement of a KCN-insensitive type of respiration in the iron effect. We then examined the effect of KCN on the viability of cells treated with bactericidal antibiotics (kanamycin and polymyxin B) in the presence and absence of iron. Figure 5B shows that iron-promoted survival against bactericidal antibiotics (kanamycin and polymyxin B) was decreased under 0.5 mM KCN, as assessed by measuring the number of CFU. However, iron still enhanced survival against both antibiotics significantly in the presence of KCN, coinciding with the results shown in Fig. 5A. We further examined the effect of KCN on iron-promoted antibiotic resistance at different concentrations (∼0.125 to 4 mM) by determining minimal lethal concentrations (MLCs) of kanamycin and polymyxin B. Results in Fig. 5C demonstrate that the MLCs of kanamycin and polymyxin B were decreased by KCN treatment, but under all concentrations tested, MLCs were higher in the presence of iron. KCN did not affect the MICs of other bacteriostatic antibiotics in the presence or absence of iron as much as it did for bactericidal antibiotics (Fig. S8). Although iron-altered respiration and iron-promoted resistance were both affected by 0.5 mM KCN (Fig. 5A and B), it is noteworthy that there still remained the iron-promoting effect, insensitive to 0.5 mM KCN, that enhanced cell viability against bactericidal antibiotics (Fig. 5B). This implies that the iron-altered respiration involves at least two different systems: one that is susceptible to KCN and the other that is relatively insensitive to KCN at its sublethal concentration. Taking all these data together, we propose that iron-promoted resistance to bactericidal antibiotics can be attributed to an altered respiration mode in S. coelicolor, a large portion of which is relatively insensitive to KCN. FIG 5KCN treatment and antibiotic resistance under iron-replete conditions. (A) Ratio of NAD to NADH as shown in Fig. 4A after KCN treatment (0.5 mM) for 30 min in the presence of kanamycin and iron (Km+Fe). Treatment with either kanamycin (Km, 0.5 μg/mL) or iron (Fe, 250 μM) was included with a no-treatment control (Con). (B) Numbers of CFU as shown in Fig. 2B after KCN treatment for 30 min. CFU/mL were enumerated by viable counts of serially diluted 8-h cultures in the presence of antibiotics and iron (Km+Fe and PMB+Fe). PMB, polymyxin B. Treatment with kanamycin (Km, 0.5 μg/mL), PMB (8 μg/mL), or iron (Fe, 250 μM) was included with a no-treatment control (Con). (C) MLC values of kanamycin or PMB by KCN (∼0.125 to 4 mM) treatment for 30 min. Each MLC value was determined with (AB+Fe) or without (AB; black) iron. The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviations, of results from three independent experiments. P values are indicated from an unpaired multiple t test. n.s., nonsignificant. KCN treatment and antibiotic resistance under iron-replete conditions. (A) Ratio of NAD to NADH as shown in Fig. 4A after KCN treatment (0.5 mM) for 30 min in the presence of kanamycin and iron (Km+Fe). Treatment with either kanamycin (Km, 0.5 μg/mL) or iron (Fe, 250 μM) was included with a no-treatment control (Con). (B) Numbers of CFU as shown in Fig. 2B after KCN treatment for 30 min. CFU/mL were enumerated by viable counts of serially diluted 8-h cultures in the presence of antibiotics and iron (Km+Fe and PMB+Fe). PMB, polymyxin B. Treatment with kanamycin (Km, 0.5 μg/mL), PMB (8 μg/mL), or iron (Fe, 250 μM) was included with a no-treatment control (Con). (C) MLC values of kanamycin or PMB by KCN (∼0.125 to 4 mM) treatment for 30 min. Each MLC value was determined with (AB+Fe) or without (AB; black) iron. The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviations, of results from three independent experiments. P values are indicated from an unpaired multiple t test. n.s., nonsignificant. Effect of KCN on MICs of bacteriostatic antibiotics in the presence or absence of iron supplementation. MIC values of bacteriostatic antibiotics by KCN treatment for 30 min. Each MIC value was determined with (AB+Fe; red) or without (AB; black) iron. The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviations, of results from three independent experiments. Download FIG S8, PDF file, 0.1 MB. Mycobacterium smegmatis also displays antibiotic resistance under iron-replete conditions. We next investigated whether this iron effect is unique to S. coelicolor or streptomycetes, since the bacteria of the genus Streptomyces are producers of diverse antibiotics in nature (14). The effect of iron on resistance to kanamycin and polymyxin B was examined in other bacteria from the phyla Actinobacteria (M. smegmatis and Corynebacterium glutamicum), Firmicutes (Bacillus subtilis), and Proteobacteria (Escherichia coli and Vibrio vulnificus). As shown in Fig. 6A, we observed that M. smegmatis and, to a lesser extent, C. glutamicum displayed iron-promoted resistance to both of the bactericidal antibiotics, kanamycin and polymyxin B. The effect of KCN on number of CFU and NADH oxidation was examined in M. smegmatis as shown in Fig. 5. As demonstrated in Fig. 6B and C, treatment with a sublethal concentration of KCN led to reductions in both CFU and NADH oxidation under iron-replete conditions, as observed in S. coelicolor. It was also similarly observed that KCN did not completely reduce the NADH oxidation and number of CFU in M. smegmatis, implying the existence of a KCN-insensitive portion in iron-altered respiration (Fig. 6B and C). Therefore, the iron-promoted resistance to bactericidal antibiotics appears to be a conserved phenomenon in actinobacteria and occurs most likely through the alteration of respiration. FIG 6Iron-promoted antibacterial resistance is conserved in Mycobacterium smegmatis. (A) MLC values of kanamycin and PMB in bacterial species (Sco, S. coelicolor; Msm, M. smegmatis; Cgl, C. glutamicum; Eco, E. coli; Bsu, B. subtilis; Vvu, V. vulnificus) in the presence (+) or absence (−) of iron. (B) CFU as shown in Fig. 5B by KCN treatment for 30 min. CFU/mL were enumerated by viable counts of serially diluted 12-h cultures in the presence of antibiotics and iron (Km+Fe and PMB+Fe) in M. smegmatis. Treatment with kanamycin (Km), PMB, or iron (Fe) was included with a no-treatment control (Con). (C) Ratio of NAD to NADH after KCN treatment for 30 min in the presence (Fe) or absence (Con) of iron in M. smegmatis. The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviations, of results from three independent experiments. P values are indicated (unpaired multiple t test). n.s., nonsignificant. Iron-promoted antibacterial resistance is conserved in Mycobacterium smegmatis. (A) MLC values of kanamycin and PMB in bacterial species (Sco, S. coelicolor; Msm, M. smegmatis; Cgl, C. glutamicum; Eco, E. coli; Bsu, B. subtilis; Vvu, V. vulnificus) in the presence (+) or absence (−) of iron. (B) CFU as shown in Fig. 5B by KCN treatment for 30 min. CFU/mL were enumerated by viable counts of serially diluted 12-h cultures in the presence of antibiotics and iron (Km+Fe and PMB+Fe) in M. smegmatis. Treatment with kanamycin (Km), PMB, or iron (Fe) was included with a no-treatment control (Con). (C) Ratio of NAD to NADH after KCN treatment for 30 min in the presence (Fe) or absence (Con) of iron in M. smegmatis. The values shown are the means, with error bars representing the standard deviations, of results from three independent experiments. P values are indicated (unpaired multiple t test). n.s., nonsignificant.