Results Statistics of antibiotic resistance open reading frames Non-redundant gene catalogs resulting from mWGS were subjected to Blastp with CARD (the Comprehensive Antibiotic Research Database) in order to detect and characterize ORFs referring to the ARGs and metabolic processes existing in the rhizobiome of Moringa oleifera and surrounding bulk soil microbiomes. Unique ORFs described in Supplementary Tables 2, 3 were generated either from assembled reads of a given soil sample or from scaftigs resulted from gathering and re-assembling unassembled reads of all samples (NOVO_MIX) referring to low abundant reads, respectively. The two tables described these ORFs, after being aligned with analog sequences in CARD, in terms of the mismatch and gap sizes (in nt) and nucleotides assigning gene start and end points. A total of 809 and 1,142 ORFs were generated from the two previously mentioned categories of gene assembly (Supplementary Tables 2, 3, respectively). Of which, a number of 1,416 ORFs across the two categories of gene assembly referring to a total of 183 ARGs were detected (Supplementary Table 4). The results in Supplementary Table 4 indicated that a number of 79 of these ARGs was represented by only a single ORF (referring to non-abundant ARGs), while the other ARGs were represented by two or more ORFs (referring to abundant, highly abundant, and the most highly abundant ARGs). Supplementary Figure 1 indicated the 30 most abundant ARGs referring to the top highly abundant ARGs with > 20 ORFs/ARG. Supplementary Table 4 indicates that the most highly abundant ARGs include mtrA (189 ORFs), soxR (104 ORFs), oleC (103 ORFs), golS (88 ORFs), and novA (74 ORFs) genes. Differential abundance of antibiotic resistance genes The results in Figure 1 indicated almost no differences in the total number of ARGs in samples of the two soil type (average of ∼125 ARGs/sample), while abundance of these ARGs in terms of ORFs/ARG was extremely higher in rhizosphere of M. oleifera than that in bulk soil microbiome. Supplementary Table 4 indicates abundance of ARGs across types of microbiome surrounding M. oleifera, while Figure 2 refers to the most highly abundant ARGs with > 20 ORFs/ARG. Abundance of these 14 ARGs in samples within each soil type was homogeneous, except for three genes, e.g., myrA, vanSO and dfrA3, that showed non-homogeneous abundance of ORFs among bulk soil microbiome samples (Supplementary Table 5). These three ARGs were not analyzed further. FIGURE 1Number (A) and abundance (no. ORFs) (B) of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) of rhizobiomes (Rl–R3 in red) and bulk soil (Sl–S3 in blue) microbiomes surrounding Moringa oleifera. Number (A) and abundance (no. ORFs) (B) of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) of rhizobiomes (Rl–R3 in red) and bulk soil (Sl–S3 in blue) microbiomes surrounding Moringa oleifera. FIGURE 2Means of the top highly abundant antibiotic resistance genes (>20 ORFs/ARG) across type of microbiome surrounding Moringa oleifera. Patterned columns refer to ARGs whose numbers of ORFs in bulk soil samples are non-homogeneous. Box colors of other ARGs match those of Figure 4. Means of the top highly abundant antibiotic resistance genes (>20 ORFs/ARG) across type of microbiome surrounding Moringa oleifera. Patterned columns refer to ARGs whose numbers of ORFs in bulk soil samples are non-homogeneous. Box colors of other ARGs match those of Figure 4. Estimated abundance (in unit ppm) of ARGs for the different samples of the two types of microbiomes is shown in Supplementary Table 5, while the most highly abundant ARGs (>20 ORFs/ARG) in microbiomes of the two soil types are shown in Figure 3A and described based on CARD information in Supplementary Table 6. The results in the table indicated that abundance of ARGs with > 20 ORFs/ARG was significantly higher in rhizobiome than that of bulk soil microbiome, except for golS gene, that showed no significant difference (P = 0.315) between samples of the two soil types. The results of relative abundance of ARGs supported those of abundance only for mtrA, novA, and parY mutant, as relative abundance of these three ARGs in rhizobiome is higher than that of bulk soil microbiome (Figure 3B). However, the results for golS (Pontel et al., 2007) and rpoB2 (Ishikawa et al., 2006) genes showed higher relative abundance in bulk soil microbiome than that in rhizobiome (Figures 3B, 4). We assume the results of both abundance and relative abundance of ARGs ought to be considered. FIGURE 3Abundance in unit ppm (A) and relative abundance (B) of the top highly abundant antibiotic resistance genes (>20 ORFs/ARG) in different samples of rhizobiomes (Rl–R3) and bulk soil (Sl–S3) microbiomes surrounding Moringa oleifera. Unit ppm was calculated by magnifying 106 times of the original abundance data. Box colors of other ARGs match those of Figure 4. Abundance in unit ppm (A) and relative abundance (B) of the top highly abundant antibiotic resistance genes (>20 ORFs/ARG) in different samples of rhizobiomes (Rl–R3) and bulk soil (Sl–S3) microbiomes surrounding Moringa oleifera. Unit ppm was calculated by magnifying 106 times of the original abundance data. Box colors of other ARGs match those of Figure 4. FIGURE 4Circle chart of the top highly abundant antibiotic resistance genes (>20 ORFs/ARG) in different samples of rhizobiomes (Rl–R3) and bulk soil (S1–S3) microbiomes surrounding Moringa oleifera. The chart is divided into two sides, where the right one refers to samples (S and R) information and the left refers to antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) information. The wideness of different scales of inner and outer circles refers to relative abundances of ARGs and samples. Colors in inner circle refer to sum of relative abundance of all ARGs per sample (right side) and sum of relative abundance of all samples per ARG (left side). While, colors in outer circle refer to detailed relative abundance of different ARGs per sample (right side) and detailed relative abundance of different samples per ARG (left side). Circle chart of the top highly abundant antibiotic resistance genes (>20 ORFs/ARG) in different samples of rhizobiomes (Rl–R3) and bulk soil (S1–S3) microbiomes surrounding Moringa oleifera. The chart is divided into two sides, where the right one refers to samples (S and R) information and the left refers to antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) information. The wideness of different scales of inner and outer circles refers to relative abundances of ARGs and samples. Colors in inner circle refer to sum of relative abundance of all ARGs per sample (right side) and sum of relative abundance of all samples per ARG (left side). While, colors in outer circle refer to detailed relative abundance of different ARGs per sample (right side) and detailed relative abundance of different samples per ARG (left side). Differential abundance of bacterial phyla and antibiotic resistance mechanisms ARGs were further categorized to metabolic processes or AMR families at the bacterial phylum level (Supplementary Table 7). The analysis was focused on 12 bacterial phyla and 55 categories of ARG-related metabolic processes. Based on abundance results, Figure 5 describes the five most common phyla, e.g., Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, Acidobacteria, Chloroflexi, and Firmicutes, and the 13 most common metabolic processes. Abundance of phyla with > 30 ORFs regardless of metabolic process, abundance of metabolic processes regardless of phylum, as well as abundance of the interaction between phyla and metabolic processes are shown in Supplementary Figures 2, 3, and 5, respectively. Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, Acidobacteria represent the most abundant bacterial phyla regardless of metabolic processes (Supplementary Figure 2). The eight most abundant metabolic processes shown in Supplementary Table 8 almost refer to all the previously detected highly abundant ARGs in Supplementary Table 6, except for rpoB2 and ileS genes, whose metabolic processes, e.g., rifamycin-resistant beta-subunit of RNA polymerase (rpoB) and Bifidobacterium ileS conferring resistance to mupirocin, respectively, were less abundant (with < 30, Supplementary Figure 3), thus, were not analyzed further. These selected metabolic processes refer to three resistance mechanisms (Supplementary Table 8) namely antibiotic efflux, antibiotic target alteration and antibiotic target protection. FIGURE 5Circle chart of metabolic processes at the bacterial phylum level of the top highly abundant antibiotic resistance genes (>20 ORFs/ARG) in different samples of rhizosphere and bulk soil microbiome s surrounding Moringa oleifera. The chart is divided into two sides, where the right one refers to bacterial phylum information and the left refers to metabolic processes information. The wideness of different scales in inner and outer circles refers to relative abundances of metabolic processes and bacterial phylum. Colors in inner circle refer to sum of relative abundance of all metabolic processes per bacterial phylum (right side) ai1d sum of relative abundance of all bacterial phyla per metabolic process (left side). While, colors in outer circle refer to detailed relative abundance of different metabolic processes per bacterial phylum (right side) and detailed relative abundance of different bacterial phyla per metabolic process (left side). Circle chart of metabolic processes at the bacterial phylum level of the top highly abundant antibiotic resistance genes (>20 ORFs/ARG) in different samples of rhizosphere and bulk soil microbiome s surrounding Moringa oleifera. The chart is divided into two sides, where the right one refers to bacterial phylum information and the left refers to metabolic processes information. The wideness of different scales in inner and outer circles refers to relative abundances of metabolic processes and bacterial phylum. Colors in inner circle refer to sum of relative abundance of all metabolic processes per bacterial phylum (right side) ai1d sum of relative abundance of all bacterial phyla per metabolic process (left side). While, colors in outer circle refer to detailed relative abundance of different metabolic processes per bacterial phylum (right side) and detailed relative abundance of different bacterial phyla per metabolic process (left side). AMR families referring to antibiotic efflux in this study include resistance-nodulation-cell division (RND), ATP-binding cassette (ABC), major facilitator superfamily (MFS) antibiotics as well as the two-component regulatory kdpDE (potassium dependent D/E) system. AMR families referring to antibiotic target alteration included glycopeptide resistance gene cluster (vanRO), aminocoumarin resistance parY and aminocoumarin self-resistance parY. While, AMR family referring to antibiotic target protection included RbpA bacterial rpoB-binding protein, only. As indicated in Supplementary Table 6, ARGs of mtrA, soxR, and golS participate in the metabolic process of RND antibiotic efflux, while oleC and novA genes participate in the metabolic process of ABC antibiotic efflux. soxR and kdpE genes participate in the metabolic processes of MFS antibiotic efflux and two-component regulatory kdpDE (potassium dependent D/E) system, respectively. Thus, soxR gene is the only participating in two metabolic processes. vanRO, parY mutant, and rbpA genes participate in the metabolic process of glycopeptide resistance gene cluster, in the metabolic process of aminocoumarin resistance/self-resistance, and in the metabolic process of RbpA bacterial rpoB-binding protein, respectively (Supplementary Table 6). The results of circle chart of Figure 5 referring to the left and right sides of inner circle support those of Supplementary Figures 2, 3 in terms of abundance, respectively. In terms of relative abundance, the results in Figure 5 (outer circle) and Supplementary Figure 4 indicate that Proteobacteria relatively dominates in terms of RND antibiotic efflux pump followed by Actinobacteria. However, the other seven metabolic processes are relatively dominated by Actinobacteria. Proteobacteria also showed high relative abundance of processes MFS antibiotic efflux pump and two-component regulatory kdpDE system. The results involving the most highly abundant ARGs, along with their metabolic processes and resistance mechanisms referring to the five bacterial phyla are summarized in Figure 6. FIGURE 6Summary of the resistance mechanisms along with the participating AMR gene families and their ARGs of bacterial phyla across soil microbiomes surrounding Moringa oleifera. Different intensities of the red color of the circles refer to the level of differential abundance in bacterial phyla. Summary of the resistance mechanisms along with the participating AMR gene families and their ARGs of bacterial phyla across soil microbiomes surrounding Moringa oleifera. Different intensities of the red color of the circles refer to the level of differential abundance in bacterial phyla. Validation of the resistomic data for the two soil types surrounding M. oleifera was done at the metatranscriptomic level via qPCR (Supplementary Figure 5). The experiment involved four highly abundant ARGs namely mtrA (acc. no. ARO:3000816), soxR (acc. no. ARO:3004107), oleC (acc. no. ARO:3003748), and novA (acc. no. ARO:3002522). Metabolic process of the first two ARGs is the RND antibiotic efflux pump, while that of the second two ARGs is the ABC antibiotic efflux pump. The results of qPCR for the metatranscriptomic data in Supplementary Figure 5 align with those of the in silico genomic dataset in Figure 3.