RESULTS Identification of chaetoglobosin a transporter gene 
CgMfs1
 in C. globosum
W7 BlastP algorithm analysis from the online platform NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology Information) suggested that CgMfs1 (GenBank: XP_001220482.1), which was adjacent to the chaetoglobosin A biosynthetic gene cluster, was a member of the MFS efflux pump. Sequence research revealed that the CgMfs1 gene has a 1716‐bp open reading frame that encodes a polypeptide of 571 amino acids with an estimated molecular weight of 61.40 kDa and a theoretical isoelectric point of 5.77. The results of conservative region analysis by using NCBI database revealed that CgMfs1 contains a highly conserved MFS multi‐domain between amino acids 100 and 552. TMHMM Server v. 2.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/) program showed that CgMfs1 comprises 12 putative transmembrane spanning domains (TMS) uniformly distributed at positions 98–273 and 338–545 (Figure S1A). The results of hydropathy profile predicted by SACS HMMTOP Transmembrane Prediction Page (http://www.sacs.ucsf.edu/cgi‐bin/hmmtop.py) are presented in Figure S1B. These findings indicated that the transmembrane structure of CgMfs1 was similar to the typical configuration of H+ antiporter (DHA) 12 involved in toxin export. Besides, CgMfs1 could have also evolved from a single 2‐TMS hairpin structure that triplicated to produce a 6‐TMS unit and then replicated to form a 6TMS/6TMS arrangement, which is the most frequent topological type of the MFS secondary transporters (Paulsen et al., 1996; Reddy et al., 2012). Moreover, three‐dimensional modelling of CgMfs1 predicted by using SwissProt (http://swissmodel.expasy.org/) proposed that the multi‐MFS protein systematically arranged around a central channel may be associated with substrate binding and translocation (Figure S1C) and that it contains four highly conserved motifs (motifs B, C, D2 and G) in the sequence (Figure S1D) that belong to MFS signature structures (Paulsen et al., 1996). The results of in silico analyses of the hypothetic transporter CgMfs1 unconditionally support that the hydrophobic protein with 12 putative TMS could act as a transporter of the MFS superfamily. Silencing strategy leads to decrease in chaetoglobosin A production The DHA12/DHA14 subfamily proteins from bacteria and fungi have been reported to be involved in secondary metabolite transport and multidrug resistance (Fernandez‐Aguado et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2012; Roohparvar et al., 2007). To investigate the functions of CgMfs1 transporter in C. globosum, the expression of the target gene was silenced, and the resulting effects were analysed. The vector pSilent1 was employed to interrupt the objective gene in the wild‐type C. globosum, and the flow diagram is shown in Figure 1. CgMfs1‐R (Figure 1A) and CgMfs1‐L (Figure 1B) were connected to carrier pSilent1 through the enzyme sites HindIII/XhoI and BglII/SphI. Each step of the construction was chemically transformed into Escherichia coli DH5α competent cells, and the transformants were digested by an appropriate enzyme(s) and verified by agarose gel electrophoresis (Figure 1C, D). Only CgMfs1‐pSL2 isolate carried a successful integration of CgMfs1‐L and CgMfs1‐R within the original plasmid. The scramble control plasmid was created by utilizing a method similar to that of CgMfs1‐pSL2. First, we tested the mutants that had an expected infusion of the target gene as evidenced by diagnostic PCR with the primers pSF and pSR (Table S3) designed according to the pSilent1 skeleton sequence. When using the primers, a 1242‐bp DNA fragment was amplified from the transformants, except No. 4 isolate, whereas a 320‐bp fragment was amplified from the empty pSilent1 carrier (Figure S2A). During the establishment process, restriction assays were used to verify if the fragment had accurately fused with the vector, and the results are presented in Figure S2B, C. All the three transformants could be cut and formed two bright bands, demonstrating that the empty vector had accurately connected to the sequence. The plasmids CgMfs1‐pSL2 and pSilent‐SCL1, which were used for further investigation, were sequenced after double‐enzyme digestion and were found to be 100% identical to the template. FIGURE 1Schematic for silencing strategy of the CgMfs1 gene in C. globosum and chaetoglobosin A yield detection by HPLC. (A) the amplified result of CgMfs1‐R by using as primers oligonucleotides SRF and SRR; (B) the amplified result of reverse fragment CgMfs1‐L by using as primers oligonucleotides SLF and SLR; (C) CK: Empty carrier pSilent1 digested with BglII and SphI used as the negative control. 7: CgMfs1‐pSR7, contains pSilent1 plasmid (7056 bp) and interference sequence (461 bp) after BglII and SphI digestion. (D) CK: Empty carrier pSilent1 digested with HindIII and XhoI used as the negative control. 2: CgMfs1‐pSL2, contains pSilent1 plasmid (7056 bp) and interference sequence (461 bp) after HindIII and XhoI digestion. Schematic for silencing strategy of the CgMfs1 gene in C. globosum and chaetoglobosin A yield detection by HPLC. (A) the amplified result of CgMfs1‐R by using as primers oligonucleotides SRF and SRR; (B) the amplified result of reverse fragment CgMfs1‐L by using as primers oligonucleotides SLF and SLR; (C) CK: Empty carrier pSilent1 digested with BglII and SphI used as the negative control. 7: CgMfs1‐pSR7, contains pSilent1 plasmid (7056 bp) and interference sequence (461 bp) after BglII and SphI digestion. (D) CK: Empty carrier pSilent1 digested with HindIII and XhoI used as the negative control. 2: CgMfs1‐pSL2, contains pSilent1 plasmid (7056 bp) and interference sequence (461 bp) after HindIII and XhoI digestion. CgMfs1‐pSL2 was transformed by utilizing polyethylene glycol (PEG) mediated protoplasts transformation. A total of eight independent hygromycin‐resistant colonies were separated, and SC1–1 (derived from pSilent‐SCL1 transformation) and wild‐type C. globosum W7 were used as control. First, the integrated hairpin structure was identified by diagnostic PCR, and a 1242‐bp silencing cassette was amplified with the flank primers (pSF and pSR) of the seven mutants and reference strain SC1–1, whereas no fragment of the wild‐type strain was amplified (Figure S3), confirming that the mutants has a complete hairpin structure that can be used to achieve gene silencing. Furthermore, to test the influence of CgMfs1 interference on chaetoglobosin A production, the seven mutants and the parental strain were cultivated in potato dextrose agar (PDA) medium for 9 days at 28°C. The fermentation broth was treated as described in the experimental procedures and the samples were analysed by high‐performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Two of the seven pure separated mutants, namely, MFS1–3 and MFS1–4, presented a significant decrease in the yield of chaetoglobosin A, with the reduction percentages reaching 73.54% and 80.40%, respectively (Figure S4A). Subsequently, morphological characteristics of the optimal mutants were further examined by cultivating the mutants in PDA medium for 14 days at 28°C and observing them under optical microscope and SEM. The aerial hyphae and substrate mycelium of all the examined strains were well developed and distinctly verrucose with 2.6–3.3 μm diameter. Olivaceous‐brown, irregularly arranged, non‐motile, ovoid and one‐celled spores (8.8–9.5 × 7.0–7.6 μm) with a smooth surface on aerial mycelium were noted (Figure 2A), which revealed that the mutant strains exhibited representative traits of the genus Chaetomium (Lodha, 1964), with no differences between the reference strain and CgMfs1‐silenced mutants. These results suggested that the CgMfs1 gene is not involved in the regulation of morphological development. In addition, to clarify the changes in the chaetoglobosin A biosynthesis in CgMfs1‐inactive mutants, the key enzymes genes such as polyketide synthase (CgPKS, Protein Accession No. CAO91861), enoyl reductase (CgER, Protein Accession No. CAO91860), cytochrome P450 oxygenase (CgP450, Protein Accession No. CAO91862) and FAD‐dependent monooxygenase (CgFMO, Protein Accession No. CAO91863) involved in chaetoglobosin A biosynthetic pathway (Figure S5) were examined by quantitative real‐time PCR (qRT‐PCR). During the fermentation process, samples were collected every 3 days, and the relative expression levels of each transcript were calculated using 2−ΔΔCT formula, considering the expression level of each gene of the parental strain C. globosum W7 (incubated in PDA medium for 6 days) as 1.0 (Figure 3). As expected, transcription of CgMfs1 was markedly decreased in the mutants at all the tested time points, whereas that in SC1–1 and wild‐type strain was similar. Moreover, CgPKS, which is responsible for the carbon skeleton synthesis of chaetoglobosin A (Ishiuchi et al., 2013), was also found to be significantly reduced in the mutants. At 12 days of fermentation, the transcription of CgMfs1, CgPKS, CgP450, CgFMO and CgER in MFS1–3 was reduced to 0.36, 0.65, 0.90, 0.88 and 0.79, and to 0.29, 0.52, 0.86, 0.76 and 0.75 in MFS1–4, respectively, when compared with that observed in the wild‐type strain. These findings implied that efficient silencing of CgMfs1 in the engineered strains possibly influenced the transcription of chaetoglobosin A biosynthesis related genes. FIGURE 2Effects of CgMfs1 disruption on phenotypic development, cell growth and chaetoglobosin A production. (A) Morphological profile of detected isolates on PDA medium and photographs of cultures observed by optical microscope and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Bar, 10 μm. (B) the extracellular and total production of chaetoglobosin a in different CgMfs1‐silencing transformants after 21 days cultivation in the PDA liquid medium. (C) Growth curves of C. globosum, SC1–1, MFS1–3 and MFS1–4 cultured in fermentation medium. Biomass is expressed as dry cell weight. (D) Quantitative chaetoglobosin a production of detective isolates cultured in fermentation medium. Error bars show standard deviations. Effects of CgMfs1 disruption on phenotypic development, cell growth and chaetoglobosin A production. (A) Morphological profile of detected isolates on PDA medium and photographs of cultures observed by optical microscope and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Bar, 10 μm. (B) the extracellular and total production of chaetoglobosin a in different CgMfs1‐silencing transformants after 21 days cultivation in the PDA liquid medium. (C) Growth curves of C. globosum, SC1–1, MFS1–3 and MFS1–4 cultured in fermentation medium. Biomass is expressed as dry cell weight. (D) Quantitative chaetoglobosin a production of detective isolates cultured in fermentation medium. Error bars show standard deviations. FIGURE 3Relative expression levels of CgMfs1, CgPKS, CgP450, CgFMO and CgER in C. globosum W7 (wild type), SC1–1 (scramble control), MFS1–3 and MFS1–4 (CgMfs1‐silent mutants) grown in PDA medium. All RNA samples were isolated from 6, 9, 12 and 15 days cultures. The primers employed for qRT‐PCR are listed in Table S3 and β‐Actin gene from the C. globosum W7 genomics was used as an internal control. The transcriptional levels of biosynthetic related genes are presented relative to that of wild‐type species collected after fermentation for 6 days, which was arbitrarily assigned a value of 1.0. The error bars represent standard deviations from three independent experiments. p‐values were determined by Student’s t‐test. Different lowercase letters indicate values that are significantly different (p < 0.05), different majuscule letters indicate values that are significantly different (p < 0.01). Relative expression levels of CgMfs1, CgPKS, CgP450, CgFMO and CgER in C. globosum W7 (wild type), SC1–1 (scramble control), MFS1–3 and MFS1–4 (CgMfs1‐silent mutants) grown in PDA medium. All RNA samples were isolated from 6, 9, 12 and 15 days cultures. The primers employed for qRT‐PCR are listed in Table S3 and β‐Actin gene from the C. globosum W7 genomics was used as an internal control. The transcriptional levels of biosynthetic related genes are presented relative to that of wild‐type species collected after fermentation for 6 days, which was arbitrarily assigned a value of 1.0. The error bars represent standard deviations from three independent experiments. p‐values were determined by Student’s t‐test. Different lowercase letters indicate values that are significantly different (p < 0.05), different majuscule letters indicate values that are significantly different (p < 0.01). Subsequently, the yield of chaetoglobosin A and biomass of mycelia extracted from the fungal strains were evaluated at the same time points. HPLC quantification revealed a significant decline in the chaetoglobosin A yield of two CgMfs1 silent mutants throughout the time course, when compared with the parental and control strains (Figure 2D), and all the tested strains reached equilibrium after 15 days of fermentation. At equilibrium, the chaetoglobosin A yield of MFS1–3 and MFS1–4 declined from 58.66 to 19.95 and 17.13 mg/L (calculated by using a chaetoglobosin A standard curve), respectively. In addition, as shown in Figure 2B, the extracellular and total production of target compound in the CgMfs1‐inactivated species was evidently lower than that in the reference strains. Nevertheless, the results of biomass showed that the two mutants presented similar biomass with no apparent decrease, when compared with those of the reference strains (Figure 2C). Combined with the findings of qRT‐PCR, these data indicated that disruption of CgMfs1 reduced chaetoglobosin A production, presumably by decreasing chaetoglobosin A export and thus increasing feedback inhibition, which might possibly affect the expression levels of key genes involved in chaetoglobosin A biosynthesis. CgMfs1‐overexpressing mutants showed enhanced chaetoglobosin A production To confirm the assumption that CgMfs1 is involved in chaetoglobosin A transport, the expression of CgMfs1 was enhanced by using a strong promoter gpdA in C. globosum W7. Figure S6 shows the design and construction of the integrative plasmid pBARGPE1‐CgMfs1‐OE6 that was used to improve CgMfs1 expression. The CgMfs1‐overexpressing carrier pBARGPE1‐CgMfs1‐OE6 and empty vector pBARGPE1‐EGFP were introduced into the protoplasts of C. globosum W7, and various transformants were selected based on their ability to grow in hygromycin‐supplemented medium. Diagnostic PCR assay of all the isolates, using the primers OEXEG‐F and OEXEG‐R to confirm accurate integration of CgMfs1 overexpression cassette, detected a 1851‐bp sequence in 10 independent mutants (Figure S6D). Subsequently, these 10 candidates were incubated in PDA medium for 9 days at 28°C and the fermentation broth was preprocessed and investigated for chaetoglobosin A production. As expected, chaetoglobosin A production of most of the isolates was increased at varying degrees; in particular, OEX1, OEX13 and OEX19 showed 226.06%, 444.97% and 228.38% increases in chaetoglobosin A production, respectively (Figure S4B). Subsequently, the phenotypic properties of the optimal CgMfs1‐overexpressing strains were further examined by incubating the strains in PDA medium for 14 days at 28°C and observing the colonies under a light microscope, standard electron microscope and fluorescence microscope. As shown in Figure 4A, the colony diameter, aerial hyphae diameter, shape and size of the spores of the CgMfs1‐overexpressing strains remained unchanged, when compared with those of the parental strain and the control isolate pB‐CK1. These results suggested that unlike the structural gene of the biosynthetic cluster and global regulator, the transporter gene CgMfs1 has no significant effect on cellular development (Cheng et al., 2021a, 2021b; Hu et al., 2012). In addition, green fluorescence signals (Figure 4A) corresponding to EGFP‐CgMfs1 were coincident as inferred, confirming that the fluorescent protein gene had been integrated into the genome of the target cells and correctly expressed. Moreover, to further examine the impact of CgMfs1 overexpression on the transcription of its targets, the expression of four genes involved in chaetoglobosin A biosynthetic cluster, namely, CgPKS, CgER, CgP450 and CgFMO, was examined at different time points. For this purpose, the RNA samples were extracted from the mycelia of the candidate strains cultivated for various days (6, 9, 12 and 15 days), and the relative expression levels were tested by qRT‐PCR. The results showed that transcription of CgMfs1 was obviously improved in the mutants at all the tested time points, whereas that in the vector control was similar to the CgMfs1 transcription in the parent strain (Figure 5). Interestingly, the transcription of CgPKS was up to 2.51‐, 2.89‐ and 2.59‐fold higher in the mutants at 12 days, when compared with that in the wild‐type and vector control strains, respectively. As the CgPKS gene is most likely to catalyse the first crucial step of chaetoglobosin A production (Ishiuchi et al., 2013), this transcription pattern of CgPKS might possibly be another reason for the higher levels of chaetoglobosin A in the mutants, when compared with those in the reference strains. Meanwhile, the transcription levels of CgER and CgP450 were also observed to be higher in the CgMfs1‐overexpressing mutants, when compared with those in the control strains, which could be owing to the fact that CgER and CgP450 are necessary for extending the carbon framework and modifying the precursors of chaetoglobosin A (Ishiuchi et al., 2013). FIGURE 4Phenotypic characteristics, cell growth and chaetoglobosin A production of the CgMfs1 overexpress mutants OEX1, OEX13 and OEX19, in addition, C. globosum W7 and pB‐CK1 (containing empty vector) were employed as the control. (A) Morphological profile of detected species on PDA medium and photographs of cultures observed by optical microscope, fluorescence microscope and scanning electron microscopy. Bar, 10 μm. (B) the extracellular and total production of chaetoglobosin a in different CgMfs1‐overexpression derivatives after 21 days incubation. (C) Influence of the CgMfs1 mutants in C. globosum W7 on cell growth. C. globosum W7, pB‐CK1 (vector control), OEX1, OEX13 and OEX19 (containing CgMfs1 overexpression cassette) incubated in fermentation broths and sampled interval of 3 days. (D) Yield curve of chaetoglobosin a of overexpression mutants at different culture time. Error bars show standard deviations. Phenotypic characteristics, cell growth and chaetoglobosin A production of the CgMfs1 overexpress mutants OEX1, OEX13 and OEX19, in addition, C. globosum W7 and pB‐CK1 (containing empty vector) were employed as the control. (A) Morphological profile of detected species on PDA medium and photographs of cultures observed by optical microscope, fluorescence microscope and scanning electron microscopy. Bar, 10 μm. (B) the extracellular and total production of chaetoglobosin a in different CgMfs1‐overexpression derivatives after 21 days incubation. (C) Influence of the CgMfs1 mutants in C. globosum W7 on cell growth. C. globosum W7, pB‐CK1 (vector control), OEX1, OEX13 and OEX19 (containing CgMfs1 overexpression cassette) incubated in fermentation broths and sampled interval of 3 days. (D) Yield curve of chaetoglobosin a of overexpression mutants at different culture time. Error bars show standard deviations. FIGURE 5Transcriptional activity in wild‐type C. globosum W7 in response to multiple copies of CgMfs1. Relative transcription levels of CgPKS (PKS‐NRPS hybrid), CgP450 (cytochrome P450 oxygenases), CgFMO (FAD‐dependent oxidoreductase), CgER (enoyl reductase) and CgMfs1 (MFS transporter) in OEX1, OEX13 and OEX19 (containing CgMfs1 overexpression cassette) were compared to the vector control (pB‐CK1) and parent cell. Samples were collected from PDA medium with a various fermentation time (6, 9, 12 and 15 days). The β‐Actin gene was used as an internal control. Each sample was tested in triplicate by quantitative RT‐PCR, using gene‐specific primers (Table S3). The error bars represent standard deviations from three independent experiments. P‐values were determined by Student's t‐test. Different lowercase letters indicate values that are significantly different (p < 0.05), different majuscule letters indicate values that are significantly different (p < 0.01). Transcriptional activity in wild‐type C. globosum W7 in response to multiple copies of CgMfs1. Relative transcription levels of CgPKS (PKS‐NRPS hybrid), CgP450 (cytochrome P450 oxygenases), CgFMO (FAD‐dependent oxidoreductase), CgER (enoyl reductase) and CgMfs1 (MFS transporter) in OEX1, OEX13 and OEX19 (containing CgMfs1 overexpression cassette) were compared to the vector control (pB‐CK1) and parent cell. Samples were collected from PDA medium with a various fermentation time (6, 9, 12 and 15 days). The β‐Actin gene was used as an internal control. Each sample was tested in triplicate by quantitative RT‐PCR, using gene‐specific primers (Table S3). The error bars represent standard deviations from three independent experiments. P‐values were determined by Student's t‐test. Different lowercase letters indicate values that are significantly different (p < 0.05), different majuscule letters indicate values that are significantly different (p < 0.01). As can be seen from Figure 4C, the mycelial biomass rapidly increased from 3 to 12 days and reached an equilibrium from 15 to 21 days, and the maximum mycelial biomass of OEX1, OEX13 and OEX19 increased from 6.13 g/L to 7.35, 7.41 and 7.96 g/L, respectively. The chaetoglobosin A accumulation curve of the control strains and OEX13 stabilized in 15 days of fermentation, whereas that of the two mutants, OEX1 and OEX19, reached an equilibrium in 12 days. HPLC analysis revealed that OEX13 produced the highest titre of chaetoglobosin A, which was increased from 61.96 to 298.77 mg/L, whereas OEX1 and OEX19 generated 147.56 and 155.92 mg/L chaetoglobosin A, respectively (Figure 4D). Meanwhile, effective enhancement of CgMfs1 gene expression could significantly increase the excretion and production of chaetoglobosin A (Figure 4B). These results clearly demonstrated that the hypothetical gene CgMfs1 is not only advantageous to chaetoglobosin A secretion, but also affects the expression of critical genes in the chaetoglobosin A biosynthetic cluster, and that the efflux pump located downstream of the gene cluster could have a crucial role in chaetoglobosin A production. Morphology of cornstalk after digestion with C. globosum W7 and its mutants Estimation of the economic value of biomass supply from crop residues in China revealed an annual production of about 174.4–248.6 million metric tons of agricultural residues, with corn stalk accounting for 28% of the agricultural residues (Chen, 2016). Thus, rational utilization of straw resources is an important task, which not only involves sustainable development of agriculture, but is also related to environmental safety. The biocontrol species, C. globosum W7, can decompose cornstalk by producing numerous hydrolytic enzymes such as endoglucanase, exoglucanase, cellobiose dehydrogenase and xylanase (Jiang et al., 2017). Therefore, exploitation of C. globosum W7 to generate bioactive secondary metabolites such as chaetoglobosin A from cornstalk could be a promising strategy for recycling agricultural residues. In the present study, we employed optimal CgMfs1‐overexpressing mutant OEX13 to produce chaetoglobosin A using cornstalk as the substrate, with wild‐type C. globosum W7 as control. As shown in Figure S7, the untreated straw samples were intact and well‐structured with a smooth surface (Figure S7A), whereas those digested with C. globosum W7 (Figure S7B) and OEX13 (Figure S7C) showed irregular superficies and lamellar morphology with numerous apertures. These results suggested that the saprophytic fungus C. globosum and its CgMfs1‐overexpressing mutant can effectively destroy the recalcitrant structure of straw. The structural characteristics of cornstalk observed in this study are in well accordance with those of specimens pretreated with alkaline solution of ionic liquids (Liu et al., 2018). Structural analysis of cornstalk by FT‐IR The FT‐IR spectra of cornstalk samples (Figure 6) revealed that the peak located at 3400 cm−1 represented O‐H vibrations and is caused by the stretching of O‐H in cellulose. The strong absorption peaks appeared at 2946 cm−1, which corresponded to C‐H stretching vibration in lignin. When compared with the peak of untreated cornstalk sample, that of cornstalk samples treated with C. globosum and OEX13 decreased at 3400 and 2946 cm−1, suggesting that the two C. globosum strains destroyed the structure of cellulose and lignin of cornstalk, at least to some extent. In addition, absorption bands at 1690 and 1425 cm
−1 corresponding to C=O and C‐H bonds, respectively, were detected in the control group, but were not observed in the other test groups. These results revealed that C. globosum and OEX13 can destroy the connections between lignin and aromatic rings or aliphatic compounds in cornstalk. FIGURE 6FT‐IR results of different cornstalk samples. FT‐IR results of different cornstalk samples. Mycelial growth, chaetoglobosin a production and cornstalk degradation The biomass variation curves of C. globosum W7 and OEX13 using cornstalk as the single substrate were determined by adopting the dry weight approach. As can be seen from Figure 7A, the growth of hyphae linearly varied from 3 to 9 days and became steady in 12–18 days, reaching the peak in 15 days. The maximum mycelial biomass of C. globosum W7 and OEX13 was 5.04 and 5.39 g/L, respectively. Furthermore, a time course detection of chaetoglobosin A production revealed the generation of only a small amount of chaetoglobosin A by C. globosum W7 and OEX13 in the preliminary stage of fermentation, indicating that the fungal cells were still at the primary metabolic level. However, the chaetoglobosin A yield rapidly increased from 6 to 15 days and stabilized in 18 days. When compared with the parental strain, OEX13 presented a dramatic increase in chaetoglobosin A production by 475.94% (from 40.32 to 191.90 mg/L) (Figure 7B). In spite of OEX13 decreased the levels of chaetoglobosin A 35.77% (from 298.77 mg/L to 191.90 mg/L), which was lower than that cultivated in the PDA medium. Nonetheless, the chaetoglobosin A productivities were enhanced by 258.06% (from 0.30 mg/g to 0.81 mg/g) and 257.72% (from 1.49 mg/g to 3.84 mg/g) of C. globosum W7 and OEX13, respectively (Figure 7D), when incubated in the cornstalk fermentation medium. These findings indicated that recycling of agricultural wastes biomass to produce chaetoglobosin A displayed higher productivity could result in substantial cost reduction. Figure 7C shows the degradation rates of different cornstalk samples digested by C. globosum W7 and OEX13. The degradation rates of hemicellulose, cellulose and lignin in cornstalk by C. globosum W7 were 28.31%, 40.31% and 35.26%, respectively, while those by OEX13 were 25.42%, 43.98% and 36.13%, respectively, with no significant differences between the two strains in their cornstalk degradation capacity. FIGURE 7Mycelial growth, chaetoglobosin a production, cornstalk degradation and chaetoglobosin A productivity of species C. globosum W7 and OEX13. (A) the mycelial biomass of C. globosum and OEX13 under submerged fermentation and sampled interval of 3 days. CK1: Incubation of wild‐type species in the fermentation medium without addition of cornstalk; CK2: Cultivation of the overexpression mutant OEX13 in the fermentation medium without addition of cornstalk. (B) Yield curve of chaetoglobosin A of two detected species at different culture time. CK1 and CK2 are the same as above mentioned. (C) Degradation rates of various cornstalk samples that digested by C. globosum W7 and OEX13. (D) Chaetoglobosin A productivities of species C. globosum W7 and OEX13 in different fermentation medium. Error bars show standard deviations. Mycelial growth, chaetoglobosin a production, cornstalk degradation and chaetoglobosin A productivity of species C. globosum W7 and OEX13. (A) the mycelial biomass of C. globosum and OEX13 under submerged fermentation and sampled interval of 3 days. CK1: Incubation of wild‐type species in the fermentation medium without addition of cornstalk; CK2: Cultivation of the overexpression mutant OEX13 in the fermentation medium without addition of cornstalk. (B) Yield curve of chaetoglobosin A of two detected species at different culture time. CK1 and CK2 are the same as above mentioned. (C) Degradation rates of various cornstalk samples that digested by C. globosum W7 and OEX13. (D) Chaetoglobosin A productivities of species C. globosum W7 and OEX13 in different fermentation medium. Error bars show standard deviations. Taken together, these results demonstrated that both C. globosum W7 and OEX13 could decompose the cornstalk structure and transform it to produce chaetoglobosin A. Moreover, the chaetoglobosin A yield and productivity generated by OEX13 was higher than that produced by the parental strain, indicating that overexpression of the efflux pump genes could effectively enhance the transport of the target products.