INTRODUCTION Many infectious diseases have lost their status as life-threatening conditions due to the discovery, development, and application of—often natural products-based—drugs. However, protozoal parasitic infections remain among the most devastating causes of mortality and morbidity, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. These diseases affect more than a billion people worldwide and are contributing to poverty and under-development (1–3). Examples from the WHO list of neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) are human African trypanosomiasis caused by Trypanosoma rhodesiense spp., Leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania spp., and Chagas disease (American trypanosomiasis) caused by Trypanosoma cruzi. (4) The three pathogens belong to the Trypanosomatidae, a large family of flagellated protozoa. Although malaria, caused by Plasmodium falciparum, is no longer considered an NTD since 2000, the disease still remains a major global health challenge due to its heavy death toll and high mortality levels among pregnant women and children in malaria-endemic African countries (5). The drugs currently available to treat these diseases are problematic given their serious adverse effects, limited efficacy, and most importantly the emergence of drug resistance. Therefore, there is an urgent need for the development of new, efficacious, safe, and cost-effective drugs for the fight against protozoal tropical diseases (6–8). Natural products remain a successful source of inspiration for the discovery of new drugs. About two-thirds of the drugs launched over the last 20 years derive directly or indirectly from natural resources (9). Moreover, of the 20 approved antiparasitic drugs, 9 were natural products or derivatives thereof (9). So far, all approved natural product-based drugs for the treatment of protozoal infections are plant-derived (9), but microbial natural products can also have promising bioactivities against protozoa, as displayed by fungal leucinostatins (10) or myxobacterial macyranone A (11) or chlorotonil A (12). As demonstrated by the structural diversity and variety of biological functions of the over 32,500 reported natural products, microorganisms are a prolific source of diverse and putatively biologically active metabolites (13). This plethora of natural products holds the promise of hidden bioactivities against often under-screened pathogens. Considering myxobacterial natural products, this is displayed by the recent findings of chondramides active against SARS-CoV-2 (14), the antitubercular properties of myxovalargin (15), or the potent anti-filarial activity of corallopyronin A through the inhibition of Wolbachia endosymbionts (16). Moreover, evaluation of the biosynthesis can be used to improve production titers in the heterologous expression of a natural product, as displayed for corallopyronin A (17), or to heterologously produce improved derivatives of a natural product family, as displayed for disorazoles (18). Following the initial purification of the antifungal ambruticin from a Sorangium sp. strain (19), myxobacteria as a group have increasingly gained attention as prolific producers of natural products. Their immense potential to produce compounds with novel chemical scaffolds and a wide range of biological activities is displayed by their large genomes with many biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs), as well as the over 600 known myxobacterial natural products (20, 21). Taking into account that the majority of myxobacterial taxa has not been isolated yet (22) and that increasing phylogenetic diversity in myxobacteria entails increasing chances to find new chemical scaffolds (23), sampling campaigns to find, isolate and cultivate novel myxobacteria are a promising undertaking. In this study, we describe the isolation of new myxobacterial producers of natural products leading to the discovery of four novel derivatives of the known natural product angiolam A (24, 25). Whole-genome sequencing of the new strains allowed the identification of the angiolam biosynthetic gene cluster that was verified by gene disruption in the genetically amenable producer Pyxidicoccus fallax An d48 (26, 27). Furthermore, we report the sub-micromolar bioactivities of several novel angiolam derivatives against the malaria pathogen Plasmodium falciparum that might make it an option for the development of future anti-malarial drugs.