Introduction Polyketide synthases (PKSs) are a group of enzymes that are responsible for the synthesis of complex and biologically active metabolites in all living organisms, ranging from microorganisms to plants. These enzymes work in a coordinated and sequential manner to produce these essential compounds [1-3]. Polyketides are a diverse family of natural products that display a vast array of biological activities, including antimicrobial, antiparasitic, antifungal, and anticancer properties. They have also various commercial applications as food additives, nutraceuticals, and pigments [4-10]. The synthesis of most polyketides involves the use of three main classes of PKSs, namely type I PKS, type II PKS, and type III PKS. These three types of PKSs use a similar mechanism of sequential decarboxylative condensations, which can take place with a diverse range of acyl-coenzyme A (CoA) substrates [11, 12-14]. Type I PKSs are mainly composed of multifunctional proteins that consist of various modules. These modules have non-iterative functions that are responsible for catalyzing one cycle of polyketide chain elongation [15]. Type II PKSs are characterized as multienzyme complexes, where each catalytic domain is encoded by a separate gene [13]. Type III PKSs are generally homodimeric enzymes with a single active site iteratively acting as condensing enzymes [1]. Type III PKSs, which are relatively small homodimeric proteins consisting of monomers weighing between 40-47 kDa, play a crucial role in the biosynthesis of aromatic polyketides in both bacterial and plant PKSs [7]. Type III PKSs are widely distributed in bacteria, plants, and fungi. The synthesis of 1,3,6,8-tetrahydroxynaphthalene (THN) occurs through the catalytic action of RppA, which utilizes five malonyl-CoA molecules to produce THN which subsequently undergoes spontaneous oxidation to form flaviolin (Fig. 1). It was the first functionally characterized bacterial THN synthase from Streptomyces griseus [16]. Type III PKSs are known to produce THNs as the predominant metabolites in several actinomycetes, including S. griseus [17], Saccharopolyspora erythrea [18], S. peucetius [6], S. toxytricini [19], and Sorangium cellulosum [20]. Nocardia sp. CS682 contains ThnA, one of the type III PKSs found in the Nocardia sp. CS682 genome [21]. Although its biological function is currently unknown, ThnA has been implicated in the biosynthesis of 1-(α-L-(2-O-methyl)-6-deoxymannopyranosyloxy)-3,6,8-trimethoxynaphthalene (IBR-3) [22]. Nocardia sp. produces a UV-protective compound known as IBR-3, which is formed by removing the complete PKS region of nargenicin [15]. Different enzymes like methyltransferases and glycosyltransferase are involved in the post-modification of 1,3,6,8-tetrahydroxynaphthalene (THN) during the formation of IBR-3 (Fig. 2) [15, 21, 22]. Due to the crucial role played by ThnA in forming the core THN scaffold, we carried out a sequence alignment of ThnA with established type III PKSs. This alignment yielded a high level of bootstrap support, thereby strengthening the case for heterologous expression. In this study, we characterized the function of thnA by heterologous expression in S. lividan sp. TK24. ThnA is a key enzyme in the production of 1-(α-L-(2-O-methyl)-6-deoxymannopyranosyloxy)-3,6,8-trimethoxynaphthalene from five malonyl-CoA molecules to form THN, which undergoes further modifications by methyltransferases and glycosyltransferase enzymes involved in this pathway to yield the final product IBR-3.