Introduction Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly diagnosed and second deadliest form of cancer globally [1]. The incidence of CRC is increasing worldwide and is predicted to continue to do so into the future, particularly in economically-impoverished regions where access to screening programmes is limited [2]. Worryingly, there is a rising incidence rate of CRC in young adults, pointing to changes in risk factors during early life [1]. It is well established that there are both environmental (diet, lifestyle) and genetic factors which influence the risk of developing CRC [3]. Individuals with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) such as ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease are at an increased risk of developing CRC, known as colitis-associated colorectal cancer (CA-CRC) [4]. Low-fibre, ultra-processed Westernised diets are known to be linked with increased CRC risk, and the adoption of this diet is likely a factor in the increasing CRC cases being seen in some demographics [1]. Diet heavily influences the composition of the gut microbiome and the role of microbes in CRC causation has become a topic of considerable research, particularly as individuals with CRC often display dysbiosis and greater colonisation with potentially harmful bacteria [5–7]. In 2006, the pathogenicity locus known as the polyketide synthase (pks) island was found to encode the biosynthetic machinery for the synthesis of the genotoxin, colibactin. The genotoxicity of this secondary metabolite raised questions as to whether bacteria could have an aetiological role in CRC development [8]. The pks island was subsequently shown to be widespread amongst Enterobacteriaceae, particularly in E. coli belonging to the B2-phylogroup, which are common colonisers of the human intestinal tract [9]. In fact, it is estimated that 20–22 % of healthy individuals are colonised by pks+ E. coli [10, 11]. However, pks+ bacteria appear to be significantly over-represented in the gut microbiome of patients with CRC, familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), and IBD, when compared to controls [10–14]. Research following the discovery of the pks island has established a strong link between the genotoxin and carcinogenesis, particularly with the identification of a distinct colibactin mutational signature in colorectal carcinomas following exposure to pks+ E. coli [15, 16]. Colibactin is a peptide-polyketide genotoxic metabolite and cyclomodulin, capable of inducing DNA damage such as interstrand cross links (ICLs), double strand breaks (DSBs), and single base pair substitutions (SBSs), as well as insertion and deletion (indel) mutations and rearrangement breakpoints. These genomic aberrations may lead to chromosomal instability and cell cycle arrest [8, 17–25]. Characterization of the molecular structure of colibactin led to identification of two electrophilic cyclopropane warheads on opposing sides of the molecule which are capable of alkylating DNA and have high binding affinity for adenine rich motifs (AAAATT), causing DNA cross-linking and activation of DNA repair machinery in human cells [20, 22, 26, 27]. Further to being a potential procarcinogen, colibactin has proposed involvement in bacterial competition, induction of prophages, and manipulation of the gut microbiota composition [28–30]. Indeed, colibactin may have originally evolved as a weapon against competing microbes in the poly-microbial environment, providing advantage to pks+ bacteria and shaping the surrounding microbial community. Studies in mice indicate that colibactin may exert an effect on the gut microbiota at large, with pks+ bacteria colonisation resulting in decreased microbial diversity [28]. It has also been shown that colibactin is capable of targeted killing of enteric pathogens and commensals such as Vibrio cholerae and Bacteroides fragilis, and interspecies culture has been shown to upregulate expression of the pks island [29, 31]. Recently, it was demonstrated that colibactin induces lytic development in bacteria containing prophages and that some non-pks+ bacteria encode the colibactin resistance protein, ClbS [30]. Further, the colibactin intermediary product, N-myristoyl-d-Asn (NMDA) is capable of disrupting the membrane of S. aureus, a finding that has led to speculation about the involvement of NMDA in the mechanism of colibactin transport into target cells [31]. Whilst many colibactin-producing strains are pathogenic, certain commensal strains also possess the pks island, including Nissle 1917, which has long-standing and proven probiotic effects and is available commercially as a therapeutic. Despite extensive research into colibactin structure, function, and effect on the human gastrointestinal tract, how the pks island and colibactin biosynthesis are regulated remains to be fully clarified. In this review, we aim to provide an up-to-date synopsis of current understanding of regulation of the pks island and colibactin determinant.