INTRODUCTION Bacterial antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a constantly growing threat to human health. A 2022 report in The Lancet estimated that in 2019 1.27 million deaths were attributable to bacterial AMR globally (1). One of the primary antibiotic targets is the ribosome (2), and, accordingly, bacteria protect their protein synthesis machinery via diverse resistance mechanisms (3–5). The functional elements primarily targeted by the antibiotics on the large (50S) ribosomal subunit are the peptidyl transferase centre (PTC) and the nascent polypeptide exit tunnel (NPET) (3,6). The PTC is targeted by numerous antibiotic classes, including (i) nucleoside compounds, such A201A (7) and hygromycin A (7,8), (ii) pleuromutilins, such as tiamulin (9), (iii) lincosamides, such as the natural compound lincomycin (10), its semi-synthetic derivative clindamycin (11) and the fully synthetic antibiotic iboxamycin (12), (iv) type A streptogramins, such as virginiamycin M1 (13), (v) phenicols, such as chloramphenicol (14) and (vi) oxazolidinones, such as linezolid (15,16). Antibiotics targeting the NPET are represented by macrolides, such as the context-dependent polypeptide elongation inhibitor erythromycin (17,18), and by members of the streptogramin B class such as quinupristin (19). The F subfamily of ABC ATPases includes both ribosome-associated antibiotic resistance (ARE) ABCFs (5,20), as well as multiple housekeeping factors that assist protein synthesis and ribosome assembly (21–24). ARE-ABCF factors mediate antibiotic resistance in human pathogens (exemplified by staphylococcal VgaA (25) and closely related Listeria monocytogenes VgaL/Lmo0919 (26,27)), in environmental bacteria (exemplified by B. subtilis VmlR (28)), and also confer self-resistance in antibiotic producers (exemplified by Streptomyces lincolnensis LmrC (29)). Expression of ARE-ABCFs is suppressed through abortive transcription termination, with full-length mRNA production and ARE-ABCF expression being induced upon antibiotic-induced ribosomal stalling on a regulatory upstream open reading frame (uORF) that is located in the mRNA region preceding the ARE-ABCF main ORF (27–32). ARE-ABCFs are classified into eight relatively well-studied major subfamilies (ARE1 to ARE8) as well numerous poorly characterised phylum-specific groups, such as actinobacterial AAF1-6 (24,33). Members of ARE1-3, ARE5 and ARE6 subfamilies protect the ribosome from PTC-targeting pleuromutilin, lincosamide and streptogramin A (PLSA) antibiotics, with the most well-studied ARE-ABCF representatives being ARE1 VgaA and Lmo0919/VgaL, ARE2 VmlR, ARE3 LsaA, ARE5 LmrC and ARE6 Sal (27,28,34–36). ARE-ABCFs ARE8 PoxtA and ARE7 OptrA protect against phenicol and oxazolidinone (PhO) transpeptidation inhibitors (33,37,38). Finally, members of the ARE4 subfamily (such as TlrC) and a subset of ARE1 ABCFs (such as Msr) confer resistance to macrolide and streptogramin B (MSB) antibiotics (39–41). ABCF ATPases share a common molecular architecture with two ABC nucleotide-binding domains NBD1 and NBD2 connected by an interdomain linker element which is variable in both amino acid sequence and length (24). This linker is referred to as the antibiotic resistance determinant (ARD) in the case of ARE-ABCFs (34,41,42) and as the P-site tRNA-interaction motif (PtIM) in the case of housekeeping ABCFs (21,22). The ARD is crucial for displacement of the antibiotic by ARE-ABCFs, and its deletion renders the resistance determinant inactive (24). Macrolide-resisting factors such as ARE1 MsrE have the longest ARDs which extend into the ribosomal NPET (41). ARDs of PLSA-resisting ARE-ABCF are shorter, as they make contact with the PTC-bound antibiotic and/or induce conformational changes in the PTC that promote antibiotic dissociation (26,34,43). PhO-resisting PoxtA and OptrA have even shorter ARDs, which act by perturbing the positioning of the CCA-end of the P-site tRNA, rather than directly distorting the PTC (33). Finally, the P-site tRNA-contacting PtIM elements of the housekeeping ABCFs are in general shorter than the ARD elements of ARE-ABCFs (21–23). Antibiotic resistance mediated by ARE-ABCF can synergise with other mechanisms, importantly with resistance mediated by 23S rRNA methylation. This rRNA modification is installed by clinically relevant and widely-spread Erm (Erythromycin resistance methylase) and Cfr (Chloramphenicol and florfenicol resistance) rRNA methyltransferases and confers resistance to macrolide, PhO and PLSA antibiotic classes (44–47). Recently we have found that B. subtilis ARE-ABCF VmlR can synergise with Cfr to grant significant resistance to lincosamides, including the highly potent fully-synthetic antibiotic iboxamycin (48). The cfr gene is often encoded next to lsa ABCF in bacterial pathogens such as Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile) (49) and staphylococci (50), which is supportive of the two resistance determinants cooperating to grant high levels of protection. However, synergy of ARE-ABCFs with Cfr/Erm has not as yet been systematically tested experimentally. Importantly, Erm-mediated resistance is associated with an increased risk of C. difficile infection (CDI), and the risk further increases upon clindamycin use (51). Neither the role of ARE-ABCFs in C. difficile resistance, nor potential ARE-ABCF–Erm synergy, has been studied. To further understand the molecular mechanisms underlying intrinsic antibiotic resistance in Gram-positive bacteria, we have characterised four genome-encoded ARE-ABCF factors. First, we show that well-studied B. subtilis ARE2 VmlR mediates resistance to A201A and hygromycin A, which expands the spectrum of ABCF-mediated resistance to nucleoside antibiotics. Second, we characterise the resistance spectrum of a VmlR representative with an unusually long ARD encoded in the genome of soil bacterium Neobacillus vireti (formerly Bacillus vireti)—VmlR2. We rationalise the antibiotic sensitivity data by solving the cryo-EM structure of the VmlR2-70S complex and probe its mechanism through mutagenesis. Third, we demonstrate that actinobacterial AAF1 Ard1 encoded by the A201A producer Streptomyces capreolus (52,53) is a narrow spectrum ARE-ABCF that specifically mediates self-resistance against nucleoside antibiotics. Fourth, we establish Clostridial pleuromutilin and lincosamide resistance protein (CplR) as an ARE1 ABCF resistance factor. We characterise CplR of the important human pathogen C. difficile (originally annotated as a multidrug resistance (MDR)-type ABC transporter CDIF630_02847 (54)), of Clostridium perfringens, a common causative agent of food poisoning, as well as of the mutualistic bacterium Clostridium sporogenes. We demonstrate that CplR contributes to intrinsic resistance of Clostridioides to lincosamides lincomycin, clindamycin and iboxamycin as well as pleuromutilin retapamulin. While lincosamide resistance mediated by CplR can be overcome by the fully synthetic lincosamide iboxamycin (12), ARE1 CplR provides high levels of iboxamycin resistance when acting together with transposon-encoded ErmB present in clinically isolated C. difficile strain 630 (55). Given that clindamycin treatment is associated with increased risk of CDI (51,56–59), our discovery and characterisation of CplR-mediated lincosamide resistance mechanism in C. difficile is of direct clinical importance.