Introduction Protein synthesis on the ribosome is assisted by an array of dedicated protein factors that participate in all steps of translation: initiation, elongation, termination and recycling. The most well-studied group of ribosome-associated factors is translational GTPases (1–3). These factors promote the ‘core’ activities of the ribosome: bacterial initiation factor 2, IF2, promotes correct positioning of the initiator fMet-tRNAi, elongation factors EF-Tu and EF-G assist the delivery of aminoacyl-tRNA and catalyse ribosomal translocation, respectively, and, acting together with Ribosome Recycling Factor, RRF, EF-G splits the ribosome into subunits after the polypeptide is completed. While translational GTPases all bind to the ribosomal A (acceptor) site, multiple ‘accessory’ factors act in the E (exit) site. Bacterial elongation factor P, EF-P, accesses the ribosomal peptidyl transferase center, PTC, to relieve ribosomal stalling on proline-rich motifs (4–8). While the C-terminal OB domain of the factor interacts with the mRNA in the E site (4) with the guanosine residue in the first position acting as a recognition element (9), the N-terminal KOW domain stabilises the P-site tRNA in the PTC (4,10). With the notable exception of a group of Actinobacterial species (11,12), in the vast majority of bacteria, PTC stimulation by EF-P requires the posttranslational modification of a conserved lysine residue located in the loop region between beta-strands three and four (β3Ωβ4) of the KOW domain, with specific modifications differing in different bacterial lineages (13–17). In Bacillus subtilis, EF-P is modified with a 5-aminopentanol moiety at Lys32 (15) via a multistep assembly pathway that relies on several enzymes: GsaB, YnbB, YmfI, YaaO, YfkA and YwlG (18). GsaB, YnbB and YmfI directly catalyse the EF-P modification while YaaO, YfkA and YwlG are believed to play an indirect role though supporting synthesis of the substrate (18). EF-P is not essential in B. subtilis, nor in Escherichia coli (18,19). EF-P loss results in a pleiotropic phenotype, which in B. subtilis involves compromised sporulation (due to the reduced expression of the Spo0A transcription factor) (20) and swarming mobility (due to the reduced expression of multiple swarming mobility-associated proteins, including FliP and FlhP) (15). However, EF-P is essential in other bacterial species such as Neisseria meningitidis (21), and the eukaryotic EF-P orthologue, eIF5A, is essential in yeast (22) and flies (23). Notably, in addition to its role in promoting translation elongation on proline-rich stretches, eIF5A also plays a crucial role in translation termination (24); no similar function has been shown for EF-P. Finally, numerous bacterial species, including E. coli, encode a second EF-P paralog, named EF-P like (EfpL) or elongation factor P-like protein (YeiP) (9). While the two paralogues have overlapping functions, EfpL and EF-P display a certain degree of functional diversification as they alleviate ribosomal stalling on distinct proline-containing motifs (9). The F subfamily of ABC ATPases (ABCFs) comprises another group of E-site-binding translation factors in bacteria (25,26). The family includes both antibiotic resistance (ARE) factors as well as housekeeping proteins that assist protein synthesis and ribosome assembly (27–31). The B. subtilis genome encodes five ABCFs: a dedicated antibiotic resistance factor VmlR (32) and housekeeping factors YdiF, YfmM, YfmR/Uup and YkpA/YbiT (29). The exact functions of housekeeping ABCFs are unclear. Multiple lines of evidence suggest that, analogous to how ARE ABCF resolve ribosome stalling caused by antibiotics (33–37), housekeeping ABCFs resolve other stalling events in an NTPase-dependent manner by reaching into the PTC with their P-site tRNA interaction motif (PtIM) domain (27,28,38) (Figure 1). E. coli EttA is by far the best characterised housekeeping ABCF, with structural and biochemical evidence indicating a role in the regulation of the first rounds of translation elongation (27,28,38). The EttA subfamily evolved from the diversity of the Uup ABCF subfamily (29). Several studies suggest a non-ribosomal role for Uup in resolving DNA repair intermediates (39,40) and transposon excision (41). At the same time, disruption of the uup gene in E. coli strain lacking an accessory translational GTPase BipA moderately exacerbates the cold sensitivity and ribosome assembly defects of the ΔbipA strain, while Uup overexpression of suppresses the defects (33). Given the BipA’s chaperone-like role in late stages of the 50S assembly (42), this genetic interaction is suggestive of Uup playing a role in translation or/and ribosome assembly. The ribosomal function of Uup is further supported by specific inhibition of protein synthesis upon expression of the ATPase-deficient (EQ2) variant due to non-productive association of the Uup-EQ2 variant with the ribosome (33,43). Ectopically overexpressed ABCF-EQ2 variants preferentially bind to the vacant E site of 70S initiation complexes (IC) (27,28) which has been successfully exploited for immunoaffinity-based purification of ABCF-EQ2:IC complexes for structural studies (36,37,44,45). Figure 1.Generalised model for ribosomal rescue by housekeeping ABCF ATPases. Translation though ‘challenging’ amino acid motifs stalls the ribosome, inactivating the PTC. Housekeeping ABCF binds to the ribosomal E site and accesses the PTC with its P-site tRNA interaction motif (PtIM) domain. Following the NTPase-dependent reset of the PTC by the factor, the ABCF departs from the E site; translation resumes. The exact nature of the stalls resolved by the individual ABCFs is currently unclear. Generalised model for ribosomal rescue by housekeeping ABCF ATPases. Translation though ‘challenging’ amino acid motifs stalls the ribosome, inactivating the PTC. Housekeeping ABCF binds to the ribosomal E site and accesses the PTC with its P-site tRNA interaction motif (PtIM) domain. Following the NTPase-dependent reset of the PTC by the factor, the ABCF departs from the E site; translation resumes. The exact nature of the stalls resolved by the individual ABCFs is currently unclear. We have characterised the potential functional overlap between the two classes of E-site-inspecting factors in B. subtilis: EF-P and housekeeping ABCFs. While the two classes cannot operate on the ribosome simultaneously due to a steric clash, we show a genetic between epf and yfmR, with functional assays demonstrating that B. subtilis YfmR is able to resolve ribosome stalling on Asp-Pro motifs in the absence of EF-P. Furthermore, we demonstrate that YkpA/YbiT promotes translation of EF-P-insensitive positively and negatively charged motifs.