1. Introduction Prevention and treatment of many infectious diseases is impossible without the use of antibiotics. At the same time, the efficacy of medical antibiotics is steadily declining due to the spread of antimicrobial resistance on the one hand, and the lack of fundamentally new antimicrobial agents on the other. The WHO already lists some infections caused by resistant bacteria as a “critical priority” for the development of new antibiotics [1]. Selman Waksman, one of the pioneers in the development of medical antibiotics, defined antibiotics as “a chemical substance, produced by micro-organisms, which has the capacity to inhibit the growth of and even to destroy bacteria and other micro-organisms” [2]. Since then, the definition has undergone many changes [3,4,5], and there is still no consensus. Today, “antibiotics” usually refers to antibacterial therapeutic agents based on small molecules, without insisting on their production by microorganisms. Therefore, “antibiotics” can be natural products, their semisynthetic derivatives, or fully synthetic substances. Each group contributes to the fight against microbial infections. Semisynthetic antibiotics rely on parent natural precursors, and fully synthetic antibacterials are often bioinspired. Therefore, broadly speaking, natural compounds are the main source of new antimicrobial agents [6,7]. Together with the definition of antibiotics, Waksman introduced the first platform for systematic screening of new antibiotics [8]. The workflow includes the isolation of soil-dwelling microorganisms, largely actinobacteria, and a growth inhibition assay. The subsequent purification of active compounds from selected culture broths gave us many useful natural products (Figure 1). The main classes of medicinal antibiotics were discovered in this “golden age”—1940–1960s—when the Waksman phenotypic screening approach was exploited by many groups both in academia and in the pharmaceutical industry [9]. The stagnation in antibiotic discovery, along with various difficulties in their development, allows one to ask a question: “Is the success story over?” [10]. Due to a variety of issues, antibiotic development became very risky and costly for pharmaceutical companies. Since improving antibiotic development requires primarily legislative solutions, there is little that researchers can contribute. However, scientists can and should extract all useful antimicrobial substances from nature to the largest extent possible. Thus, let us take a look at the current trends in this area. After decades of success, researchers recognized the limitations of the “Waksman platform”:Most of the soil microbiome is unculturable in standard lab conditions. Even for actinomycetes, classical isolation methods yield a large number of Streptomyces colonies, but other species of the class are underrepresented. As a result, we cannot evaluate the biosynthetic potential of the majority of microorganisms (the microbial dark matter problem).Screening of cultures with broad antimicrobial activity often yields toxic and/or well-known compounds (the re-isolation problem).The screening requires prolonged cultivations (to isolate axenic cultures, for test fermentations, etc.) and resource-consuming activity-guided isolation of antibiotics. In general, it cannot be adapted for fast and high-throughput screening. Most of the soil microbiome is unculturable in standard lab conditions. Even for actinomycetes, classical isolation methods yield a large number of Streptomyces colonies, but other species of the class are underrepresented. As a result, we cannot evaluate the biosynthetic potential of the majority of microorganisms (the microbial dark matter problem). Screening of cultures with broad antimicrobial activity often yields toxic and/or well-known compounds (the re-isolation problem). The screening requires prolonged cultivations (to isolate axenic cultures, for test fermentations, etc.) and resource-consuming activity-guided isolation of antibiotics. In general, it cannot be adapted for fast and high-throughput screening. Although random search sporadically provides some interesting results (e.g., the recent discovery of gausemycins (Figure 2), a new class of lipoglycopeptide antibiotics possessing an original mechanism of action against Gram-positive bacteria [11]), it cannot be considered a modern methodology anymore. In this review, we summarize the main advancements that overcome the limitations of traditional phenotypic screening or increase its efficiency. We have critically analyzed both the methodology and the outcome of recent studies (from 2012 to the present). The new approaches emerging in this multidisciplinary area of research can be schematically divided into three main classes, as shown in Figure 3.