1. Introduction Fungi are a major source of secondary metabolites (SMs), also referred to as natural products, and defined as a large diversity of low-molecular-weight organic compounds that are synthesized from simple and inorganic precursors SMs are not directly involved in growth and development; rather, they convey a selective advantage promoting in the survival and fitness of the producing organism [1]. Although a wide range of fungi-derived SMs have already been identified, many SMs remain unknown. So far, approximately 120,000 fungal species have been identified; nevertheless, this number only accounts for less than 8% of the estimated total number of fungal species existing on earth [2]. Furthermore, only a small percentage of SMs have been identified from fungi due to the technical challenges of discovering and identifying novel SMs. Fungi can produce a diversity of SMs, including not only beneficial SMs that can be developed into pharmaceutical, agrochemical, and cosmetic products, but also those with negative impacts on humans, plants, livestock, and the environment. For instance, phytotoxins produced by plant pathogenic species can cause many crop diseases, resulting in considerable economic losses and environmental problems [3]. Mycotoxins, a group of toxic compounds that are formed via the metabolism of specific fungi, pose a threat to livestock production and human health [4]. In contrast, many valuable SMs have also been produced from fungi and widely applied in various fields, including the manufacturing industry, agriculture, and medicine. For instance, lovastatin and taxol produced from unique de novo biochemical pathways in filamentous fungi are influential drugs that can treat hypercholesterolemia and cancer [5]. The source species, molecular structures, commercial products, and modes of action of a range of representative fungal SMs have been comprehensively summarized [6]. SMs are synthesized via various pathways using primary metabolites as building blocks, which are categorized into several molecular classes that include polyketides, terpenoids, and non-ribosomal peptides. The genes responsible for SM biosynthesis in the fungal genome are typically arranged adjacent to each other in the form of biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs). A fungal biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) typically contains genes encoding core synthases/synthatases, biosynthetic tailoring enzymes, regulators, and transporters, as well as enzymes related to self-resistance [7]. The number of publicly available fungal genomes has tremendously increased in recent years due to the rapid development of advanced sequencing technologies and genomic tools. This accumulation of annotated genomic information has accelerated the identification of BGCs with the aid of simultaneously developed automated genome mining tools, such as antiSMASH, MIBiG 2.0, and BiG-SCAPE [8,9,10]. By performing bioinformatic analysis of 1037 fungal genomes, Robey et al. [11] found that the number of BGCs encoded by each fungal genome varied greatly between species. Moreover, BGCs vary greatly in size, spanning from a few kb (harboring two genes) to ∼100 kb (containing up to 27 genes) [12,13]. Our understanding of the link between fungal BGCs and their associated SMs is very limited, not only because many well-characterized BGCs are transcriptionally silent, but also because a significant number of BGCs have yet to be explored for their biosynthetic potential [14]. Thus, activating silent BGCs and exploring novel BGCs in the fungal kingdom is an essential precondition for the identification of novel SMs. Numerous factors have been shown to regulate the expression of BGCs in fungi, including environmental signals, global regulators, and cluster-specific transcription factors (TFs), as well as epigenetic factors [15]. Crosstalk and interactions between these factors have been observed during the biosynthesis of fungal secondary metabolites. Among these factors, environmental signals and global regulators normally have a regulatory effect on the transcription of multiple BGCs, while cluster-specific regulators/TFs typically regulate only a specific BGC. A number of global regulators involved in BGC regulation have been described, including the velvet complex [16], BrlA [17], laeA [18], and McrA [19]. The expression of some BGCs is specifically controlled by cluster-specific TFs, and the expression levels of these TFs are closely associated with BGC activation. For TFs possessing weak native promoters, promoter replacement or TF overexpression appear to be effective in activating a previously silent BGC [20]. For example, promoter replacement of the cluster-specific transcriptional factor ATEG_06205 in Aspergillus terreus resulted in the activation of a polyketide biosynthesis gene cluster, as well as the production of highly pigmented naphthoquinones [21]. In A. terreus, overexpressing the pathway-specific transcription factor tazR using the Tet-on system activated the taz pathway and induced the production of novel azaphilones [22]. Epigenetic regulation is also critical to gene activity and occurs through various forms, including DNA methylation rewriting, histone modification, small RNA expression, and the modulation of high-order chromatin structures [15]. The reprogramming of the epigenome in fungi is emerging as a promising strategy for altering BGC activity and promoting SM biosynthesis. However, some BGCs are active under certain conditions. In order to identify SMs that are regulated by these active BGCs, knock-out strains are usually generated through gene deletion or disruption, followed by subsequent metabolite profiling. The exploration of the regulatory mechanisms of BGC expression and their connections to SM biosynthesis provides a theoretical basis for the design and evaluation of practical strategies for SM production from fungi. This review firstly summarizes general aspects of fungal secondary metabolism, including the significance of SMs and their encoding genes, followed by a brief discussion of conventional strategies used for genomic engineering in fungi. We then provide a detailed overview of recent advancements in the application of the CRISPR/Cas system for fungal genome engineering and SM production. In addition, the advantages and challenges of various CRISPR/Cas systems are compared. Finally, we point out the challenges and limitations of the currently developed CRISPR/Cas systems, and propose potential solutions and directions for future work to widen the implementation of CRISPR/Cas technology for genome engineering in fungi.