Introduction Nisin is one of the oldest known antimicrobial compounds. In 1928, the same year that Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin, Rogers and Whittier (Rogers 1928) noted that certain lactic streptococci (then called Group N Streptococcus) were inhibitory to starter cheese cultures. Almost 20 years following its discovery, this inhibitory peptide was named nisin, or ‘group N Streptococcus Inhibitory Substance’, the suffix ‘-in’ implying antibacterial properties (Hirsch and Mattick 1949). Although initially proposed for use as an antibiotic based on its activity against veterinary and clinical pathogens including Mycobacterium tuberculosis, it was deemed unsuitable due to low aqueous solubility and poor stability at physiological pH (Hurst 1981). However, in the 1950s the potency of nisin as a food preservative was realized based on its success in preventing spoilage of processed cheese by clostridia (Delves-Broughton et al. 1996). Since then, this highly modified peptide has gained approval by regulators in over 80 countries, including the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) (Chikindas et al. 2018). Nisin has been used in a wide assortment of foods including dairy and dairy desserts, canned goods, processed meats, fish, fruit juices, and beverages (Gharsallaoui et al. 2016, Todorov et al. 2022). Nisin exhibits potent activity against Gram-positive bacteria including Bacillus cereus, Listeria monocytogenes, enterococci, staphylococci, and streptococci. Nisin has also been used in limited applications in the veterinary industry to prevent or treat bovine mastitis (Roy et al. 2016). The commercial success of nisin has made it the most investigated bacteriocin (antimicrobial peptides produced by bacteria that can kill other bacteria) in terms of its genetic organization, biosynthesis, mode of action and efforts to broaden its food and potential therapeutic applications. Nisin is also a lanthipeptide, a rapidly expanding subset of the ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides (RiPPs) family (Arnison et al. 2013). Their defining feature is the presence of unusual thioether amino acids including lanthionine (Lan) and/or methyllanthionine (MeLan) that are introduced through a series of enzyme-mediated post-translational modifications (Sahl et al. 2008). Currently, lanthipeptides can be classified into five distinct groups based on the characteristics of their lanthipeptide synthetases. For Class I lanthipeptides, of which nisin is the prototypical member, the thioether cross-linked amino acids (Me)Lan are generated by two distinct enzymes: a dehydratase LanB and cyclase LanC (see later section on nisin biosynthesis). However, in Class II–IV lanthipeptides, multifunctional enzymes are employed to form (Me)Lan, namely LanM (Class II), LanKC (Class III), and LanL (Class IV). A recently discovered group of lanthipeptides that are generated via a biosynthetically distinct pathway since the biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) do not contain genes encoding well-defined Class I–IV (Me)Lan synthase homologues constitutes the newest class (Class V) (the reader is referred to excellent reviews covering these aspects in more detail (Hegemann and Süssmuth 2020, Montalbán-López et al. 2021, Lee and van der Donk 2022). Lanthipeptides that exhibit antimicrobial activity have been historically termed lantibiotics. Importantly, some lantibiotics, including nisin, exhibit multiple modes of action, which involve interactions with highly conserved cell wall synthesis intermediates as well as the ability to form pores in the bacterial membrane (Sahl and Bierbaum 2008). In the case of nisin, this dual mode of action and demonstrable high potency against multidrug resistant (MDR) bacteria makes the lantibiotic very attractive for potential use as a biotherapeutic in human and animal health related applications (Mathur et al. 2018, van Staden et al. 2021). Indeed, recent advances in genome mining tools and next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies (Biermann et al. 2022) have facilitated the prediction of novel BGCs from a diverse range of bacteria and sources including human and animal microbiomes. Consequently, the number of natural nisin variants has doubled in the last decade, representing a valuable collection of novel peptide structures that exhibit a range of properties and antimicrobial spectra. Moreover, increasing numbers of metagenomic studies are beginning to shed light on the complex interactions between microbes in the human gastrointestinal tract and the role that antimicrobial peptides might play in this context (Garcia-Gutierrez et al. 2019a, Heilbronner et al. 2021). In fact, recent microbiome-based investigations have revealed that commensal nisin producing bacteria can inhibit MDR pathogens and shape niche competition in the gastrointestinal microbiome, offering exciting prospects for the use of nisin in human therapeutic applications. The key features of nisin biosynthesis have been painstakingly unravelled over decades, including the regulation and functions of the individual biosynthetic proteins and the complex catalytic processes involved in the formation of the Lan and MeLan rings as well as the export of and immunity to the active peptide (de Vos et al. 1995, Lubelski et al. 2008). However, recent reports have offered a fascinating insight into nisin biosynthesis that also advances our fundamental knowledge regarding the cellular localization, spatial configuration, and complex interaction of the post-translational modification and transport machinery as well as a greater perception of producer self-protection (self-immunity) during nisin biosynthesis. Furthermore, the gene-encoded nature of nisin makes the bacteriocin accessible to biosynthetic engineering through site-directed mutagenesis or synthetic chemistry approaches. Elaborate expression systems in conjunction with high-throughput screening strategies have generated vast collections of nisin derivatives that exhibit altered functional properties. This research has advanced our appreciation of structure–activity relationships, modification enzyme–substrate specificity, and immunity mechanisms that can be used as the basis for the rational design of next generation nisin derivatives with possible applications, which range from activity against Gram-negative bacteria to tools for microbiome editing.