1. Introduction Antimicrobial-resistant pathogens have always been a serious threat associated with high morbidity and mortality. Multidrug-resistant “superbugs” and emerging new pathogens seem to have brought back the “pre-antibiotic era”, leaving healthcare providers with limited clinical treatment options [1]. Since the first discovery and application of antibiotics in the middle of the last century, resistance has been observed, which may predate antibiotics by millions of years [2]. Microbes use many resistance mechanisms to protect themselves from antibiotics’ cytotoxic or cytostatic effects. Resistant microbes are naturally selected for exposure to common antibiotics that inhibit or kill sensitive counterparts. Moreover, due to lack of competition, the resistant strains can easily grow, spread, and become “superbugs”, such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which often respond poorly to existing medications. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report over 2.8 million antimicrobial-resistant infections in the United States each year, accounting for more than 35,000 deaths [3]. In addition, the threat of antimicrobial-resistant infections has gotten worse. The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in increased antibiotic use, increased hospitalization-related infections, and decreased progress against antibiotic-resistant infections in the U.S. [4]. Meanwhile, sharp declines in the introduction of novel antibiotics and an associated decline in pharmaceutical industry investment have exacerbated the resistance threat [2]. Antibiotics with novel structures and new modes of action have been and will always be urgently needed. Natural products (NPs) and their derivatives have historically served as a prolific source of therapeutics, specifically antibiotics, throughout the history of medicine. After the golden age of natural product discovery from the 1940s to 1950s, the pharmaceutical industry mostly favored structural modifications and semi-synthetic analogs of existing compounds to generate new antibiotics [5]. Figure 1 illustrates the structural evolution of three generations of polyketide antibiotics based on erythromycin. Erythromycin (1) is a type I polyketide antibiotic produced by Saccharopolyspora erythraea with a 14-membered macrolactone ring and two glucose-derived deoxysugar moieties. The semisynthetic derivatives, clarithromycin (2) (methylation at the 6-hydroxy group and 14-membered lactone ring same with erythromycin) and azithromycin (3) (15-membered ring and 9-carbonyl group replaced with a methyl-substituted nitrogen), show an enhanced spectrum of activity and are active against erythromycin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae. However, such efforts far from meet the challenges of antimicrobial-resistant and emerging pathogens. Fortunately, new NP discovery efforts continue to flourish with promising results. In particular, recent genomic and bioinformatic-guided approaches have profoundly accelerated the process of novel antimicrobial agent discovery and overcome the pitfall of a high rediscovery rate through the traditional approaches [6,7]. With the advances in genomics uncovering silent gene clusters, researchers can activate silent gene clusters and obtain the encoded compounds through various techniques. Here, we reviewed the literature from 2002 to 2022 and discussed new compounds against antimicrobial-resistant pathogens discovered by genome mining of natural sources and beyond. In addition, this review examined the antimicrobial mode of action and mechanism of resistance to commonly used therapeutics.