Introduction Enediyne natural products are among the most cytotoxic small molecules known to date. They are ideal payloads for the antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) [1]. The anthraquinone-fused enediynes (AFEs) possess unique structural feature in which the anthraquinone moiety is fused with the 10-membered enediyne core to facilitate the interaction with DNA [2]. Six groups of AFEs have been identified to date, including dynemicins (DYNs), uncialamycin (UCM), tiancimycins (TNMs), yangpumicins (YPMs), sealutomicins (STMs), and non-canonical aromatized sungeidines (SGDs) (Fig. 1A). In recent preclinical studies, different synthetic UCM analogs have been applied as ADC payloads and exhibited potent antitumor activity. Some of the analogs displayed a strong bystander-killing effect, which is beneficial for their antitumor efficacy [3–5]. Furthermore, the potent antitumor effect of targeted TNM-A delivery via liposomes supports an alternative strategy for the translation of AFEs as nanomedicines [6]. However, the low production titers of AFEs severely limit their clinical development. Multiple traditional methods, such as resin supplement, ribosome engineering, fermentation optimization, and genome shuffling, had been adopted to enhance the production of the AFEs (Fig. 1A), such as DYNs [7, 8], UCM [9], TNMs [10–12], and YPMs [13]. Despite these efforts, the production titers of these compounds are still low, presenting a practical challenge for their development. Therefore, more rational strategies are required to break through the bottleneck in AFE production. Compared with conventional strain improvement approaches, metabolic engineering strategy modifies host metabolism to direct metabolic flux into target pathway by overexpressing the genes involved in precursor supply and target product formation and eliminating competing pathways [14–16]. This strategy has been successfully applied to improve the yields of many antibiotics, such as the veterinary medicine salinomycin [17], the immunosuppressive agent FK506 [18], and the natural herbicide thaxtomin [19]. In the five biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) of AFEs (Fig. 1B), many encoded proteins are highly conserved [20, 21]. Recent studies on DYN biosynthesis have revealed the dual role of PKSE in the formation of both the 10-membered enediyne core and the anthraquinone moiety [22, 23]. The biosynthetic studies on AFEs suggests that they share a common pathway in the early steps, and their structural differences are attributed to different post-modification enzymes [21]. For example, the cytochrome P450 hydroxylase TnmL and the O-methyltransferase TnmH are essential for the introduction of the hydroxyl and methoxy groups on the A-ring of TNM-A and TNM-D [24]. The extreme toxicity of enediynes has led their producers to evolve different self-resistance mechanisms, including the self-sacrifice proteins [25, 26]. The latest investigation on the self-resistance mechanism to TNMs has revealed a family of sequestration proteins (TnmS1/S2/S3) that provide resistance to the host. Such a mechanism is generic to the AFEs because homologs of TnmS1/S2/S3 are present in all BGCs for AFEs [27]. In addition, the putative self-sacrifice protein TnmB and the putative drug efflux pump TnmT1 may also contribute to resistance to TNMs. Based on our previous ribosome engineering mutant Streptomyces sp. CB03234-S [11], we adopted a combinatorial metabolic engineering strategy to further improve the titer of TNMs in this study. Using the genomic and transcriptomic data of CB03234-S, competitive BGCs were inactivated and their effects on TNM production were investigated. Furthermore, multiple biosynthetic genes, including pksE core genes, post-modification genes, and genes related to self-resistance, were overexpressed to obtain a high-producing strain for TNMs. Our work makes the large-scale production of TNMs practical and provides a solid basis for the future clinical development of AFEs as payloads for ADCs. Fig. 1Overview of the anthraquinone-fused enediynes (AFEs). (A) The structures and reported titers of representative AFEs, including DYN-A, UCM, YPM-A, STM-A, TNM-A, TNM-D, and SGD-A. The methods used for improving the titers are indicated in bracket. RS: resin supplement, SE: strain engineering, CM: chemical mutagenesis, FO: fermentation optimization, RE: ribosome engineering. (B) The biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) of AFEs. Highly conserved core genes and possible self-resistance genes are marked in different colors Fig. 1Overview of the anthraquinone-fused enediynes (AFEs). (A) The structures and reported titers of representative AFEs, including DYN-A, UCM, YPM-A, STM-A, TNM-A, TNM-D, and SGD-A. The methods used for improving the titers are indicated in bracket. RS: resin supplement, SE: strain engineering, CM: chemical mutagenesis, FO: fermentation optimization, RE: ribosome engineering. (B) The biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) of AFEs. Highly conserved core genes and possible self-resistance genes are marked in different colors Overview of the anthraquinone-fused enediynes (AFEs). (A) The structures and reported titers of representative AFEs, including DYN-A, UCM, YPM-A, STM-A, TNM-A, TNM-D, and SGD-A. The methods used for improving the titers are indicated in bracket. RS: resin supplement, SE: strain engineering, CM: chemical mutagenesis, FO: fermentation optimization, RE: ribosome engineering. (B) The biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) of AFEs. Highly conserved core genes and possible self-resistance genes are marked in different colors