Introduction Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) poses a serious threat to human health. It has been estimated that 1.27 million deaths were caused by bacterial AMR in 2019 (Murray et al., 2022) and the negative effect on human welfare is predicted to escalate in the next decades. Although the main focus on AMR has been on health care settings, it is recognized that veterinary medicine, plant- and animal production, and environmental sectors play an important role in the origin, persistence, and spread of AMR. Polyether ionophores (PIs) have been used as feed additives for production animals since the early 1970 (Chapman et al., 2010). PIs possess both antibacterial and antiprotozoal activity and are currently used in poultry production worldwide to control severe diseases such as coccidiosis caused by Eimeria spp. and necrotic enteritis caused by Clostridium perfringens (Martins et al., 2022). The antibacterial activity of PIs has also proven useful to improve feed conversion in ruminants (Callaway et al., 2003; Kim et al., 2014; Scharen et al., 2017). PIs are not used in human medicine due to their cytotoxicity. However, PIs and PI-derivatives with low toxicity are considered for therapeutic treatment of cancer (Huczyński, 2012; Kaushik et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021) and infectious diseases caused by bacteria (Wollesen et al., 2023), fungi, protozoa, and even virus (Huczyński, 2012; Lin et al., 2021). Sales and use of PIs are not systematically reported in most countries, making it difficult to estimate the global consumption level (Hansen et al., 2009; Mulchandani et al., 2023). However, based on available data from countries in Europe, North America, and Australia, PIs are among the most extensively used antimicrobial feed additives for production animals across the world (DANMAP 2015, 2016; PHAC, 2016; SWEDRES/SVARM 2016, 2017; FDA, 2023a). Polyether ionophores are produced and secreted by bacteria of the class Actinomycetia. They are highly lipophilic compounds that form lipid soluble complexes with cations and facilitate their diffusion through biological membranes. This disrupts chemical gradients across membranes and interferes with essential biological processes. The PIs display different ion selectivity for cations abundant in biological systems depending on their structure. Most commonly used PIs in animal husbandry can bind both K+ and Na+ under artificial conditions, and with the exception of monensin, these PIs prefer K+ over Na+. Lasalocid, however, has been shown to form complexes with both mono- and divalent cations (Table 1). Polyether ionophores commonly used in animal husbandry and their ion selectivity in artificial systems. Ionophore Concentration in feed Producer organism Mr Selectivity sequence References. Narasin 60–70 mg/kg† Kitasatospora aureofaciens 765 K+ > Na+ Caughey et al. (1986). Salinomycin 50–70 mg/kg† Streptomyces albus 751 K+ > Na+ Rokitskaya et al. (2023). Lasalocid (X-537A) 75–125 mg/kg† Streptomyces lasalocidi 591 K+ > Na+ > Ca2+ > Mg2+ Pressman (1968); Antonenko and Yaguzhinsky (1988). Maduramicin (X-14868A) 5–6 mg/kg† Actinomadura yumanensis 934 K+ > Na+ Liu et al. (1983). Monensin A 100–125 mg/kg† Streptomyces cinnamonensis 671 Na+ > K+ Pressman (1968); Antonenko and Yaguzhinsky (1988). Laidlomycin ~110 mg/kg# Streptovertilicillium olivoreticuli 698 K+ > Na+ > Ca2+ Gräfe et al. (1989). †Minimum and maximum concentrations of active substance/kg in complete feed for broiler production in the EU (EUR-lex, 2023). #Recommended concentration of active substance/kg for improved feed efficiency in cattle in the United States (FDA, 2023b). The antimicrobial mechanism(s) of these PIs are not fully understood. Independent of the cation preference in artificial systems, it appears that the effect of most PIs used in animal husbandry is disruption of the Na+/K+ homeostasis and a concomitant change in cytosolic pH (Russell and Strobel, 1989). This could theoretically be a direct effect of the PIs ability to bind both Na+ and K+ and thereby facilitate transport of Na+ into the cell and K+ out of the cell, and that the change in pH results from induction of endogenous membrane transport systems to restore the chemical gradients of Na+ and K+. However, the general opinion is that PIs transport a cation (Na+/K+) in one direction and H+ in the opposite direction. The primary effect would therefore be an intracellular change in Na+ or K+ gradient and a simultaneous change in pH. It has been hypothesized that the resulting disruption of membrane cation gradients induces compensatory mechanisms to restore cation-homeostasis, including Na+/K+ ATPase and F-ATPase. The activity of these compensatory mechanisms results in a secondary effect of disrupted Na+, K+, and H+ homeostasis, increased demand for ATP and subsequent tertiary effects on essential cellular processes (Figures 1A,B; Smith and Galloway, 1983; Russell and Strobel, 1989). Figure 1Proposed effects of monensin-mediated ion gradient disruption in Eimeria tenella (Smith and Galloway, 1983) parasites (A) and in gram-positive Streptococcus bovis (Russell, 1987) bacteria (B). Encircled numbers represent suggested sequence of ion transport events. Red arrows indicate direction of change in cystosolic ion concentrations. Cation gradients across a bilayer is displayed by triangles. Proposed effects of monensin-mediated ion gradient disruption in Eimeria tenella (Smith and Galloway, 1983) parasites (A) and in gram-positive Streptococcus bovis (Russell, 1987) bacteria (B). Encircled numbers represent suggested sequence of ion transport events. Red arrows indicate direction of change in cystosolic ion concentrations. Cation gradients across a bilayer is displayed by triangles. It is likely that the PI-mediated disruption of cation gradients directly or indirectly inhibits both primary and secondary membrane transport proteins resulting in disrupted import and export of nutrients, metabolites and xenobiotics. In addition, the disturbances in the intracellular cation concentration may inhibit enzymes involved in essential cellular processes. Although it has been suggested that bacterial growth inhibition could be caused either by energy depletion due to increased demand for ATP or by cell acidification as a result of influx of H+ (Russell, 1987), other mechanisms may also be involved. Polyether ionophores affect bacterial metabolism of carbohydrates, amino acids, and fatty acids. The specific effect of disrupting the chemical gradients across the cytoplasmic membrane varies depending on the cation-dependent processes and the metabolic requirements of the organism. Chow et al. showed that monensin and lasalocid inhibited growth of the gram-negative bacterium Fibrobacter succinogenes. They showed that the ATP synthesis was decreased, most likely as an effect of an inability to take up glucose via Na+/glucose symporters (Chow and Russell, 1992). PIs have also been shown to reduce amino acid transport in ruminal bacteria (Chen and Russell, 1989; Russell and Strobel, 1989; Van Kessel and Russell, 1992). In contrast, while monensin exposure caused cessation of growth of Streptococcus bovis in vitro (Russell, 1987), glucose transport was not inhibited and glucose fermentation continued resulting in continuous ATP production (Russell, 1987). The hypothesized explanation to this observation was that S. bovis can use the phosphotransferase system as well as facilitated diffusion for glucose uptake (Russell et al., 1990). Similar biological effects have been observed in the protozoan parasite Eimeria tenella where monensin caused an increase in intracellular concentrations of both Na+ and K+ (Smith and Galloway, 1983). As specific inhibition of the Na+/K+-pump increased the K+ level, it was proposed that monensin caused an initial uptake of Na+ followed by an exchange of intracellular Na+ for extracellular K+ (Figure 1B). Several anticoccidial modes of PIs have been suggested, such as energy depletion, mitochondrial stress, and inhibition of invasion of enterocytes. However, parasite swelling, and eventual bursting, have been suggested as the most likely mode of action (Smith et al., 1981; Chapman et al., 2010). Whether the osmotic stress survival of bacteria is influenced by PIs has to our knowledge not been shown experimentally. The specific activity of PIs is influenced by the extracellular conditions. Extracellular cation concentrations promoting the natural electrochemical gradients across the cytoplasm (high [Na+], [H+], [Ca2+]) enhances the activity of ionophores, whereas extracellular cation concentrations equilibrating the intracellular levels (high [K+]) decrease the ionophore-activities (Dawson and Boling, 1987; Russell et al., 1988; Chow and Russell, 1992; Van Kessel and Russell, 1992; Wollesen et al., 2023). Considering that the cation concentrations and pH varies along the length of the gastrointestinal tract of animals, it is likely that the antimicrobial effect of PIs differs in different parts of the gastrointestinal tract, and thereby exert different selection pressures on the local microbiota.