INTRODUCTION Molecules of a peptidic nature constitute a considerable part of the known diversity of natural compounds with antimicrobial activity (1). The passage of intracellularly acting peptidic antibiotics through the cell envelope is a key step limiting their concentration inside the cell (2, 3). In Gram-negative bacteria, intracellularly acting peptidic antibiotics commonly cross the outer membrane via porins or TonB-ExbBD-dependent transporters and then rely on nonspecific peptide transporters for passage through the inner membrane (4, 5). Multiple antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) cross the inner membrane through peptide/H+ symporters similar to Escherichia coli SbmA (SLiPTs [SbmA-like peptide transporters]) (6). Several others cross the inner membrane via an unrelated ATP-binding cassette (ABC) importer, YejABEF, which is powered by ATP hydrolysis (4, 7, 8). Bacteria can pump out internalized peptidic antibiotics with the help of TolC-dependent efflux pumps, thus countering uptake and enhancing resistance (4, 5, 9). Phazolicin (PHZ) is an azole-containing peptide produced by Rhizobium sp. strain Pop5 (10, 11). PHZ belongs to a class of natural products known as ribosomally synthesized and posttranslationally modified peptides (RiPPs) (12, 13). PHZ contains eight azole cycles installed into the structure of a precursor peptide through the cyclization of Ser and Cys residues by specific enzymes (Fig. 1A). PHZ is a translation inhibitor and prevents, at low-micromolar concentrations, the growth of bacteria from the Rhizobium and Sinorhizobium genera (10). Active export by the specific pump PhzE confers self-resistance to PHZ in the producing strain (10). Pop5 is a soil bacterium that establishes a symbiotic relationship with the legume Phaseolus vulgaris. It induces the formation of nodules, specific symbiotic root organs (14) that are colonized by nitrogen-fixing Pop5 bacteria. PHZ production may enable Pop5 to outcompete other rhizobia in bulk soil, during symbiosis, or both. FIG 1BacA and YejABEF transporters independently contribute to the uptake of phazolicin by Sinorhizobium meliloti. (A) Chemical structure of phazolicin. Posttranslationally installed thiazole and oxazole cycles are shown in red. (B) Schematic representation of mutations identified by whole-genome sequencing of four PHZ-resistant mutants of wild-type (wt) Sm1021. The numbers indicate the nucleotide positions in the gene where the mutation was detected. (C) CFU of Sm1021 growing on medium with (8 μM) and without PHZ. Results are presented as the averages from three biological replicates for the obtained PHZ-resistant strains (mutant 1 and mutant 4) and single and double mutants in the bacA and yejABEF genes. ND, not detected. Figure S1 in the supplemental material shows a picture of the CFU plating for one replicate. (D) Frequency of PHZ resistance acquisition in wt Sm1021 and bacA and yejA single-gene mutants. The data for three biological replicates are shown. (E) Growth curves of wt Sm1021, single mutants in the bacA and yejA genes, and the ΔbacA ΩyejA double mutant cultivated in the presence of PHZ at different concentrations. The parts of the growth curves corresponding to the delayed growth observed for single mutants in the presence of PHZ at concentrations above the MIC are shown in dotted rectangles. BacA and YejABEF transporters independently contribute to the uptake of phazolicin by Sinorhizobium meliloti. (A) Chemical structure of phazolicin. Posttranslationally installed thiazole and oxazole cycles are shown in red. (B) Schematic representation of mutations identified by whole-genome sequencing of four PHZ-resistant mutants of wild-type (wt) Sm1021. The numbers indicate the nucleotide positions in the gene where the mutation was detected. (C) CFU of Sm1021 growing on medium with (8 μM) and without PHZ. Results are presented as the averages from three biological replicates for the obtained PHZ-resistant strains (mutant 1 and mutant 4) and single and double mutants in the bacA and yejABEF genes. ND, not detected. Figure S1 in the supplemental material shows a picture of the CFU plating for one replicate. (D) Frequency of PHZ resistance acquisition in wt Sm1021 and bacA and yejA single-gene mutants. The data for three biological replicates are shown. (E) Growth curves of wt Sm1021, single mutants in the bacA and yejA genes, and the ΔbacA ΩyejA double mutant cultivated in the presence of PHZ at different concentrations. The parts of the growth curves corresponding to the delayed growth observed for single mutants in the presence of PHZ at concentrations above the MIC are shown in dotted rectangles. PHZ-resistant mutants. (A) CFU assay with 10-fold dilution series (dilution factors are indicated at the top) of wt Sm1021 and single and double mutants in yejABEF and bacA genes on YEB agar plates without PHZ and with 8 μM PHZ. Small black asterisks indicate occasional splashes of mutant 1 at the 0 and 10−1 dilutions. (B) Mutations identified by Sanger sequencing in the bacA gene of PHZ-resistant mutants selected using the Sm1021 ΩyejA strain. The numbers indicate the nucleotide positions in the gene, and the primers used for PCR amplification and sequencing are shown as blue arrows. (C) A fragment of the amino acid sequence alignment of BacA (S. meliloti) and SbmA (E. coli). (D) Structure of the E. coli SbmA dimer (subunits are shown in blue and light blue) (PDB accession no. 7P34 [6]). The amino acids homologous to those undergoing substitutions in PHZ-resistant mutants (clones B1 and B2) are shown as sticks and are in red. Download FIG S1, JPG file, 2.6 MB. In this work, we apply genetic, biochemical, structural, and microbiological approaches to characterize the uptake of PHZ by Sinorhizobium meliloti. We identified two different mechanisms that determine the net sensitivity of S. meliloti to PHZ. Extracellular polysaccharides and the periplasmic peptidoglycan (PGN) form a barrier for PHZ uptake, while two inner membrane peptide transporters import the peptide. We further make use of transporter-deficient PHZ-resistant mutants to demonstrate that PHZ biosynthesis enables its producer to eliminate susceptible bacteria.