Introduction Two of the front-page societal concerns are global warming and the increasing frequency of emerging infectious diseases, eventually turning into pandemics (Morens et al. 2020, Zhou et al. 2020). It turns out that both predicaments are partly linked. Through its influence on the ecology of living organisms vectoring infectious pathogens, the warming climate contributes to spreading endemic diseases from tropical regions into temperate areas of the globe, such as Western Europe (Hertig 2019, Fuehrer et al. 2020, Liu et al. 2020). This phenomenon is further amplified by the encroachment into pristine areas (e.g. tropical forests) where expanding human activities generate new risks through imponderable contacts with (mostly uncharted) microbial environments and their associated wildlife hosts (Bradley and Altizer 2007, Keita et al. 2014, Plowright et al. 2017, Valentine et al. 2019). While such dangers are mostly pointed out as coming from the South, more recent concerns have been raised that new plagues could also come from the Arctic, through the release of infectious agents until now trapped in perennial frozen soils (i.e. permafrost) up to 1.5 km deep and 2–3 million years old (Revich and Podolnaya 2011, Revich et al. 2012, Parkinson et al. 2014, Huber et al. 2020). Climate warming is particularly noticeable in the Arctic where average temperatures are increasing twice as fast as in temperate regions (Cohen et al. 2014). One of the most visible consequences is the widespread thawing of permafrost at increasing depths (Biskaborn et al. 2019, Turetsky et al. 2019) and the rapid erosion of permafrost bluffs (Fuchs et al. 2020), a phenomenon most visible in Siberia where deep continuous permafrost underlays most of the North Eastern territories. The ‘ice age bug’ concern has been periodically brought back to the public attention. For instance, when an exceptionally hot summer triggered local outbreaks of anthrax on Yamal Peninsula, Northwest Siberia, in 2016, a deeper than usual summer season thaw of soils above the permafrost layer (i.e. the ‘active layer’) exhumed infectious B. anthracis endospores buried in the frozen ground for 75 years (Timofeev et al. 2019). Historically frequent outbreaks of anthrax killed 1.5 million reindeer in Russian North between 1897 and 1925 and human cases of the disease have occurred in thousands of settlements across the Russian North (Hueffer et al. 2020). The capacity of deeper (hence much older) permafrost layers to preserve the integrity of ‘live’ (i.e. infectious) viral particles was demonstrated by the isolation of two previously unknown giant DNA viruses: Pithovirus (Legendre et al. 2014) and Mollivirus (Legendre et al. 2015). Those Acanthamoeba-infecting viruses were isolated (and cultivated) from a wall-sampled layer of a well-studied permafrost bluff (the Stanchikovsky Yar) (sample B, Table 1A) radiocarbon dated to 35 000 years before present (BP) (Legendre et al. 2014). This first demonstration that eukaryotic DNA viruses could still be infectious after staying dormant since the late Pleistocene came after many other studies (Vishnivetskaya et al. 2006, Hinsa-Leasure et al. 2010, Graham et al. 2012) going back to 1911 (reviewed by Gilichinsky and Wagener 1995). It was shown that ancient bacteria could be revived from even much older permafrost layers, up to half a million years (Johnson et al. 2007). Contamination by modern bacteria has been suspected in the case of older isolates (Willerslev et al. 2004). A flower plant was also revived from 30 000-year-old frozen tissues (Yashina et al. 2012), as well as various fungi (from Antarctica) (Kochkina et al. 2012) and amoebal protozoans (Shmakova et al. 2016, Malavin and Shmakova 2020). There is now little doubt that permafrost is home to a large diversity of ancient microorganisms that can potentially be revived upon thawing. Many of them, in particular among viruses, are unknown. If detected, the follow-up questions are: Are those microorganisms a threat for today's society? Could some of them represent an infectious hazard for humans, animals or plants? Can we identify microbes the metabolisms of which would accelerate the emission of greenhouse gases (e.g. methane and carbon dioxide) upon thawing? Beyond the direct infectious risk represented by viable microorganisms released from thawing ancient permafrost layers, the persistence of a multitude of genomic DNA fragments from all the organisms that were present in the soil at various times is also to be considered. Although it originated from dead (or even extinct) organisms, the permafrost DNA content constitutes a historical library of genetic resources, from which useful elements (genes) can be reintroduced into modern organisms through bacterial transformation and/or lateral gene transfer in protozoa or viruses. Of particular interest are DNA fragments coding for bacterial virulence factors or antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) the origin of which predates by far human history (Finley et al. 2013, Perron et al. 2015, Potron et al. 2015, Wright 2019). To address these questions, a first step is to evaluate the DNA in frozen soils. The technique of choice (which avoids the risk of reactivating unknown dangerous pathogens) for this task is metagenomics. In contrast with targeted approaches, such as metabarcoding (i.e. PCR-amplified subset of environmental DNA), it offers the possibility of unexpected discoveries in all domains of life and provides an estimate of the relative abundances of the various organisms, although at the cost of a lower sensitivity. Finally, the metagenomic analysis of DNA obtained from up to 60 g of frozen soil samples (Table S1, Supporting Information) is much less sensitive to eventual contaminations by minuscule amounts of ambient DNA or contemporary microorganisms and more suitable for site-to-site comparisons than culture-based approaches. Here, we report the analysis of nine subsurface Siberian permafrost samples, and of three modern surface soils from pristine area in Kamchatka. All the permafrost samples were taken from carbon-rich, ice-rich frozen soils called Yedoma deposits (Schirrmeister et al. 2013, Strauss et al. 2017) found in vast regions of northeast Siberia (Lena and Kolyma river basins in Yakutia) (Fig. S1, Supporting Information) and known for well-preserved Late Pleistocene megafauna remains (mammoths, wholly rhinoceros). Yedoma permafrost is of special interest as it is prone to rapid thaw processes such as thermokarst and thermo-erosion (Nitzbon et al. 2020) releasing not only carbon as greenhouse gases (Schneider von Deimling et al. 2015, Turetsky et al. 2020) but also its formerly freeze-locked microbial content, in which we detected a high abundance of β-lactamases genes carried in the genomes (or plasmids) of a large phyletic diversity of bacteria.