1. Introduction The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR, also known as FRAP or SKS) is a phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase-related protein kinase (PIKK) that controls cell growth, metabolism, survival, immune responses and so on. mTOR forms two complexes: mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2). mTORC1 consists of six subunits (Figure 1A–D): mTOR (including Horn, Bridge, FAT, FRB and the kinase domains), raptor (regulatory protein associated with mTOR), mLST8 (mammalian lethal with Sec13 protein 8, also known as GBL or WAT1), PRAS40 (proline-rich Akt substrate of 40 kDa), DEPTOR (containing the PDZ domain and the DEP domain tandem, DEPt), and FKBP12, which binds to the FRB domain of mTOR (Figure 1C). On the other hand, mTORC2 consists of mTOR, rictor (rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR), mSin1, mLST8, and DEPTOR (Figure 1E,F). The structures and functions of mTORC1 and mTORC2 are conserved in eukaryotes, such as yeast, worms, flies, and mammals. Raptor promotes the recruitment of substrates to mTORC1 by binding to the TOR signaling (TOS) group on the substrates. mLST8 may stabilize the kinase activation loop of mTOR. PRAS40 is a raptor-interacting protein and inhibits mTORC1. DEPTOR, which is an mTOR-binding protein, can inhibit both mTORC1 and mTORC2. mSin1 is critical for the insulin-dependent regulation of mTORC2 activity, with its PH domain inhibiting the catalytic activity of mTORC2 in the absence of insulin. mTORC2 can modulate the phosphorylation of protein kinase Cα and the actin cytoskeleton. mTORC1, but not mTORC2, is inhibited by the rapamycin-FKBP12 complex. In contrast, mTORC2 is insensitive to rapamycin treatment. The major functions of mTORC1 are to promote anabolism and to inhibit catabolism. mTORC1 promotes protein synthesis by phosphorylating p70 S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) and eIF4E-binding protein (4EBP). mTORC1 also promotes lipid synthesis via the sterol response element binding protein (SREBP) transcription factor. Meanwhile, mTORC1 can promote the synthesis of nucleotides by the ATF4-dependent expression of methylene-tetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 2 (MTHFD2), and S6K1-dependent activated carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase (CAD). Additionally, mTORC1 can also promote a shift in glucose metabolism by increasing the translation of the transcription factor HIF1α. mTORC1 regulates cell growth and metabolism, while mTORC2 mainly controls proliferation and survival by phosphorylating certain members of the AGC family of protein kinases, including PKA, PKG and PKC. Compared with mTORC1, mTORC2 mainly acts as an effector of insulin/PI3K signaling. Vellai et al. first revealed the key role of mTOR in aging in 2003 [1]. In recent decades, lifespan extension by inhibiting the mTOR pathway has been proved by more and more evidence. In addition, the activity of mTOR is also frequently deregulated in many kinds of human cancers, such as breast, lung, liver, prostate, renal and pancreatic cancers. Statistical data show that advanced age is a very important risk factor for cancer, and cancer incidence steadily increases with age [2]. This review describes the research process and future direction of mTORC1 inhibition in anti-aging and cancer therapy.