Introduction The rise of antimicrobial drug resistance (AMR) worldwide represents one of the most pressing contemporary threats to human health1,2. In the most comprehensive study to date, Murray et al. reported an estimated 4.95 million deaths associated with bacterial AMR globally in 2019 alone3. Chief among the list of AMR culprits are pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli, including third-generation cephalosporin-resistant and fluoroquinolone-resistant strains, which in total account for more than 800,000 associated deaths3. AMR is challenging to address because resistance is an inherent consequence of antimicrobial drug use; even a single long-term infection may result in the emergence of drug resistance4. The ubiquitous and non-compliant overuse of antimicrobials in both clinical and agricultural settings contribute to large scale resistance evolution2. Despite recent attention to AMR, the incidence of multidrug resistant (MDR) infections continues to rise5 and resistance to newer drugs is often observed within a few years of deployment6. In contrast, the rate of antimicrobial drug discovery has declined considerably owing to low profitability and shifting priorities within the pharmaceutical industry7,8, further exacerbating the AMR crisis. One approach to treating AMR strains is to exploit orthogonal sensitivities to one drug that arise from resistance to another drug, a phenomenon known as collateral sensitivity (CS)9–11. CS interactions have been widely observed in both drug-resistant microbes and in cancer12, and are thought to result from trade-offs inherent to the maintenance of pleiotropic drug resistance mutations9. Using laboratory-evolved drug-resistant E. coli strains, several studies have mapped out CS relationships between known antibiotics and have demonstrated their application against clinical isolates9. These include the deployment of two reciprocally CS-active drugs in an alternating drug-cycling regimen, such as cefuroxime and gentamicin in E. coli10, or the use of a primary drug with its CS-active adjuvant in combination. For example, using mecillinam with cefotaxime has been shown to constrain the evolution of a globally distributed extended spectrum β-lactamase13. Most bacterial CS studies to date, however, have been limited to known, commercially available antimicrobials14. Few studies have examined the CS potential of natural products (NPs) from an antimicrobial perspective11,15,16, despite the obvious value of NP chemical diversity and biological relevance in antibiotic therapy development. In the context of drug resistance, both known and novel NPs have the potential for CS activity. This provides an opportunity to re-examine the chemical space occupied by known NPs, which may contribute to the discovery and design of new CS-based antimicrobials. Furthermore, CS-active compounds can improve understanding of complex CS mechanisms, as well as provide additional insight into the associated mechanisms of resistance9,17. This work presents a high-throughput screening platform, based on a panel of 29 isogenic drug-resistant mutants of E. coli, to map and identify natural products that elicit CS across diverse drug-resistant phenotypes, termed Collateral Sensitivity Profiling (CSP). We first validate this approach using a collection of commercial antimicrobials covering 30 drug classes, revealing both new and previously reported CS relationships. Extrapolating this hypothesis into novel chemical space, we report the screening of a library of 6195 marine Actinobacterial and Burkholderia natural product extract prefractions and the observation of widespread CS interactions in nature. From this screen, we describe the isolation and characterization of the borrelidin family of macrolide NPs, including a new analogue borrelidin P, with specific CS activity against cephalosporin-resistant E. coli but not wildtype (WT). To our knowledge, this is the first instance of a new NP compound discovered on the basis of its CS activity. Follow-up experiments reveal that threonine—tRNA ligase (ThrRS), the known target of the borrelidins, contributes to the observed CS interaction with E. coli strains bearing cell wall biosynthesis mutations. Further investigation suggests that other targets of the borrelidins may also play a role in its CS activity. Finally, we show that co-dosing ceftazidime with borrelidin A slows the emergence of cephalosporin resistance and suppresses existing ceftazidime resistance below key thresholds.