1. Introduction Despite perceptions of being an arid wasteland, the human skin is a habitat occupied by a diverse array of microorganisms. Human skin microbiome diversity stems from microenvironment variations between body sites ranging from the Cutibacterium-dominated sebaceous regions, rich in lipids, to the halotolerant Staphylococcus that are abundant in sweat-rich areas [1,2]. The complement of these microorganisms, the microbiota, utilises host compounds as nutrient sources whilst conveying benefits to their host, such as pathogenic colonisation resistance, local immune system priming and the maintenance of lipid barriers [3]. Akin to macroecological biomes, the skin microbiota community structure consists of organisms specialised to corresponding niches that are susceptible to invasion by foreign species displacing resident organisms [2]. The composition and stability of the skin microbiome are constrained by physical factors that include pH, oxygen concentration, nutrient availability and competition, plus host symbiotic and commensal relationships [4]. Interactions between host microbiota are largely mediated by secreted biological effector compounds, such as digestive enzymes, antimicrobials and quorum sensing compounds [5]. The diversity of skin microbiota and associated effector compounds represent an underappreciated source of effectors potentially relevant to the treatment of a variety of diseases and conditions. Bioprospecting is the discovery and exploration of the biological diversity of organisms, genetic components or compounds with potential commercial or therapeutic applications. The utility of beneficial biologically derived compounds is highlighted by the discovery of antibiotics, which has revolutionised modern healthcare and drastically increased global lifespan [6]. Novel drug discovery remains necessary for improving the financial viability of therapeutic and commercial compound pipelines and healthcare outcomes [7]. There is an overwhelming need for novel treatments for bacterial infections in a contemporary world where antimicrobial resistant (AMR) pathogens are an increasing concern, with over 1 million deaths in 2019 associated with such infections [8]. Several alternative treatment strategies are in development to combat AMR infections, such as bacteriophage therapy that has recently gained momentum in Western countries [9]. The skin microbiome provides a vast resource for the development of novel treatment strategies towards the control of AMR infections. Understanding the biochemistry at the interface between host and microbiota will unravel hitherto unknown biology. The coevolution of the human skin with pathogens has resulted in control mechanisms, such as sapienic acid and psoriasin capable of the growth inhibition of AMR Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli, respectively [8,10,11]. The comparable gut microbiome has revealed a plethora of novel compounds with treatment potential for diseases such as chronic infection, cancer and obesity [12]. Whilst skin microbiota potentially harbours a greater species richness than the gut, its potential abundance of therapeutic compounds and their translational benefits are yet to be mined [3]. Advances in high-throughput genomic technologies have revealed a wealth of microbiome data, facilitating a conceptual shift whereby multicellular organisms’ functions are intrinsically linked to their microbiota [13]. Classically, microbiological investigations relied upon the direct culturing of isolates utilising historic techniques to infer organism identity. The true picture of microbiota diversity was confounded by fastidious organisms lacking the necessary growth conditions provided in vivo, such as complex metabolic interdependences [14,15]. Metagenomic techniques have facilitated more interrogative analyses of the total genomic material present within the skin, which continue to reveal ever more diversity within the skin microbiota [16,17,18,19]. Further development of artificial intelligence technologies has enabled a sophisticated analysis of metagenomic and physical data, allowing for inferences in the causal linkage of skin hydration, age and smoking status to microbiome composition and interpersonal variation [16]. Investigations utilising next-generation omics technologies have revealed a multitude of mechanisms and concepts from the skin microbiome. The human skin microbiome is a complex and dynamic field with varied applications, and many organisms and associated compounds have feasibly exploitable properties [3,4,17,18] This review is distinct through a focus on the breadth and recent advances in the therapeutic and commercial application of biological molecules gained from bioprospecting the human skin microbiome. We further explore the viability of prospective compounds for their translational capacity in human application.