Introduction Actinobacteria species are high-GC Gram-positive bacteria well-known for their prolific secondary metabolism and as a source of valuable bioactive compounds with medical and biotechnological properties [1,2]. Approximately 55% of all antibacterial compounds come from the Streptomyces genera, and another 11% are derived from other actinobacteria [3]. Identification of new antibiotic agents is important due to the emergence of new pathogens and antibiotic resistance [4]. In this regard, the actinobacteria isolated from unusual ecosystems are one of the most interesting sources of novel biologically active compounds [5, 6]. Cave ecosystems are rarely studied and contain different mineral formations, permafrost and previously unknown organisms that have evolved microclimates with minor variations in temperature, humidity, air composition and other parameters over extended periods of time [7]. Whether specific substances, especially moonmilk speleothem, exist in some caves is unclear and has been discussed in previous studies [8, 9]. As described in Encyclopedia of Geobiology (2011) the moonmilk is a carbonate deposit that occurs within various subterranean systems. Moonmilk has a white to gray color and, in contrast to rigid cave deposits such as stalactites and stalagmites, exhibits a soft, muddy texture of microcrystalline aggregates. These aggregates are mainly composed of calcite, and to a lesser extent of aragonite, monohydrocalcite, hydromagnesite, sulfates, and nitrates [10]. Cave ecosystems are of great scientific interest due to the development of the macro and microorganisms, which have undergone long evolutions in stable conditions. In addition, caves contain limited materials and have little energy exchange with the environment [11–14]. Knowledge regarding cave microbial and especially actinobacterial diversities is very limited, despite the fact that numerous caves have been identified throughout the world [12]. The microbial diversity of karstic caves has been studied to understand the impacts of microbes on cave formation and to determine how this knowledge can be used for cave conservation [15–21]. M. Maciejewska and coauthors (2015) reported the isolation of the strain Streptomyces lunaelactis sp. nov. from moonmilk speleothem collected in the cave ‘Grotte des Collemboles’(Comblain-au-Pont, Belgium) [9]. Jurado and coauthors (2010) reported the isolation of 34 novel species of actinobacteria from subterranean environments [22]. These novel actinobacteria were exemplified in the descriptions of Beutenbergia cavernae, a new genus of L-lysine-containing actinobacteria, and Agromyces subbeticus, isolated from a cave in southern Spain [23–24]. We suggested that microorganisms inhabiting an isolated ecosystem of the caves, such as biggest conglomeratic karstic cave in Siberia, should preserve a high number of unstudied bacterial strains with specific metabolic pathways and secondary products. Their isolated evolution increases the expectation that secondary metabolism genes evolved separately from the general pool and elevates the likeliness to find novel biologically active compounds. The main goal of the current research was to isolate new actinobacteria strains from atypical sources such as the water surface from an ancient underground lake and moonmilk speleothem from the Bolshaya Oreshnaya cave (Siberia) to estimate the antibiological activity with the following dereplication of secondary metabolites.