Introduction Bacteria need to respond to changes in their environment. Therefore, they require adequate means to gain and process information on the immediate surroundings. Such means are represented by two-component systems (TCSs), which are ubiquitous in all prokaryotes. A typical TCS consists of a sensor histidine kinase (HK) and a response regulator (RR).1 The HK measures a specific external signal and autophosphorylates at a conserved histidine residue within the cytosol. This phosphoryl group is transferred to the associated RR. The activated RR initiates the cellular response.2 Most RRs are transcription factors that not only change the gene expression pattern of one or more genes of the cell, but also post-transcriptional and post-translational regulation of RNAs and proteins, respectively, by RRs has been reported.3 The ability of bacteria to sense the signal enables them to react with an adaptive response. Of special interest is the glycopeptide-sensing TCS VanRS that controls the expression of glycopeptide resistance genes in gram-positive pathogens,4,5 some glycopeptide producers, and other actinomycetes.6 VanS is a membrane-standing HK. Its C-terminus extends into the cytoplasm and contains the kinase domain and the phosphorylation site.7 VanS senses the presence of glycopeptides and catalyses adenosine triphosphate-dependent autophosphorylation of a specific histidine residue. Subsequently, VanS transfers the phosphate group to an aspartate residue of VanR, which then activates the transcription of the resistance genes. However, under noninduction conditions, VanS acts as a phosphatase, removing the phosphate group from VanR.8 Glycopeptides such as vancomycin, teicoplanin, and telavancin are used for treating infections caused by gram-positive pathogens. They act by binding to the N-acyl-d-alanyl-d-alanine (d-Ala-d-Ala) termini of peptidoglycan (PG) and its precursor lipid II. This binding effectively sequesters the substrate for the transglycosylases and the d,d-transpeptidases, two key enzymes of cell wall synthesis, resulting in an inability to grow and subsequently to cell death. Glycopeptide resistance is mediated by reprogramming cell wall biosynthesis. Ten types of resistances have been characterized so far (VanA-N).9,10 In each case, the terminal d-alanine (d-Ala) in the pentapeptide side chain of the PG of gram-positive bacteria is substituted either by a d-lactate (d-Lac) (VanA, B, D, F, and M) or a d-serine (VanC, E, G, L and VanN). These substitutions result in a 1000-fold11 or 6-fold12 decreased binding affinity of the glycopeptide to its target, respectively. Categorization into the different phenotypes is based on the inducibility, the breadth of resistance to individual compounds, and the level of resistance.9 Three of those phenotypes, VanC,13 VanD,14 and VanN,15,16 are constitutively expressed. All others are inducible to different degrees by different glycopeptides. It was shown that enterococcus and staphylococcus strains expressing glycopeptide resistance genes constitutively are impaired in growth in comparison with strains where the genes are inducible.17,18 Apparently, careful control of the expression of these genes is advantageous. Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) is neither a pathogen nor a glycopeptide producer, but it is likely to encounter glycopeptides in its natural habitat. Therefore, it benefits from carrying vanRSSc, vanHAXSc, vanKSc, and vanJSc (Fig. 1C). VanHSc is a d-stereospecific lactate dehydrogenase that converts pyruvate to d-Lac. VanASc is a d-Ala-d-Ala-ligase family protein that ligates d-Ala and d-Lac to d-Ala-d-Lac-depsipeptides. VanXSc is a highly selective carboxypeptidase that cleaves the remaining d-Ala-d-Ala-dipeptide. VanKSc belongs to the Fem family of enzymes, which add the cross-bridging amino acid(s) to the stem pentapeptide of PG precursors.19 VanY is a membrane protein conferring resistance to teicoplanin. To identify the precise nature of the ligand signal that activates glycopeptide resistance in S. coelicolor A3(2), the VanB-type HK VanSSc, sensing vancomycin, but not teicoplanin, was investigated.21,22 Investigation on VanSSc revealed opposed results. On the one hand, it was shown by cross-linking experiments that vancomycin is the direct ligand of the VanSSc.21 On the other hand, Kwun et al.22 demonstrated that VanSSc is activated by vancomycin in complex with the d-Ala-d-Ala termini of PG precursors. FIG. 1.(A, B) EMBOSS stretcher pairwise sequence alignment of VnlRSAb and VanRSSc. (A) EMBOSS stretcher pairwise sequence alignment of VnlSAb and VanSSc. Transmembrane domains are indicated in blue. The extracytosolic domain is highlighted by a red box. (B) EMBOSS stretcher pairwise sequence alignment of VnlRAb and VanRSc. The site of aspartate phosphorylation is indicated by red and that of the proposed autophosphorylation by green arrow. (C) Organization of the resistance genes in Streptomyces coelicolor compared with that of Amycolatopsis balhimycina. “-” for a mismatch or a gap; “.” for any small positive score; “:” for a similarity, which scores more than 1.0; and “I” for an identity where both sequences have the same residue. (A, B) EMBOSS stretcher pairwise sequence alignment of VnlRSAb and VanRSSc. (A) EMBOSS stretcher pairwise sequence alignment of VnlSAb and VanSSc. Transmembrane domains are indicated in blue. The extracytosolic domain is highlighted by a red box. (B) EMBOSS stretcher pairwise sequence alignment of VnlRAb and VanRSc. The site of aspartate phosphorylation is indicated by red and that of the proposed autophosphorylation by green arrow. (C) Organization of the resistance genes in Streptomyces coelicolor compared with that of Amycolatopsis balhimycina. “-” for a mismatch or a gap; “.” for any small positive score; “:” for a similarity, which scores more than 1.0; and “I” for an identity where both sequences have the same residue. The actinomycete Amycolatopsis balhimycina produces the glycopeptide balhimycin, a vancomycin-type glycopeptide differing from vancomycin only in the glycosylation pattern.23,24 The balhimycin biosynthesis gene cluster contains all genes necessary for balhimycin production25 as well the vanRS-like regulatory genes, vnlRSAb and the accessory resistance gene vanYAb (Fig. 1C).26 VanYAb is a carboxypeptidase which cleaves the endstanding D-Ala-D-Ala-dipeptide from the PG precursors.27 However, the vanHAXAb genes are encoded more than 2 Mb apart from the balhimycin biosynthesis cluster. Although VnlRAb does not regulate glycopeptide resistance in A. balhimycina,27 its heterologous expression in the glycopeptide-sensitive S. coelicolor strain M600 J23016 (ΔvanRSSc) revealed unexpected effects. VnlRAb activates the vanHAXSc genes, increases actinorhodin production, and influences morphological differentiation in S. coelicolor.