INTRODUCTION Members of the genus Streptomyces are of great industrial and medical importance for their ability to produce a plethora of natural products, including antibiotics, anticancer agents and immunosuppressants 12, and many industrially relevant enzymes, such as polysaccharide hydrolases and proteases 3. Streptomycetes exhibit a complex multicellular life cycle 4. After germination of a single spore, a complex vegetative mycelium is formed following a process of apical growth and branching of the hyphae 5. The centrally located hyphae undergo a developmental cycle leading to the formation of reproductive aerial hyphae, which are erect and segment into long chains of spores 1. This process is accompanied by the lysis of nearby positioned mycelia 6, thereby liberating nutrients required for aerial growth and sporulation 7 and the production of antibiotics 8. In submerged cultures, many streptomycetes form mycelial aggregates often referred to as pellets. Because of their dense architecture, which among others causes significant mass-transfer limitations, pellets are undesirable from the perspective of industrial process design. However, antibiotics are often produced more efficiently by mycelial clumps 910. Pellet architecture depends on genetic and environmental factors, like septum formation 1112, shear stress 13, pH 14 and cell-wall fusion 15. Another important factor is the extracellular matrix, which embeds the mycelia 16. Omnipresent in all biofilms, the matrix facilitates cell signaling 17 and allows retaining liberated nutrients 18, while it also plays a major role in growth and morphogenesis 192021. The Streptomyces extracellular matrix is a complex mixture of biopolymers containing DNA 22, amyloid proteins 23 and multiple polysaccharides 24. One polysaccharide is produced at the hyphal apex by CslA and tailored by the combined efforts of GlxA and DtpA 23242526. CslA likely produces a cellulose- or chitin-like polymer, as the polymer is specifically stained by calcofluor white, which is specific for β-1,4 glycans 24. CslA plays a role in the anchoring of fimbriae-like structures attached to the hyphae of Streptomyces coelicolor, facilitating the attachment to polystyrene surfaces by working in unison with the amphipathic chaplin proteins 23. This attachment was negated by the addition of cellulases, which releases the fimbriae from the cell surface. Interestingly, removal of cslA and glxA from wild-type S. lividans or S. coelicolor inhibits pellet formation in liquid-grown cultures 2425. Pellets are formed by the self-aggregation of the mycelia in a submerged environment and share many characteristics with surface-grown colonies, including the lysis of internally positioned mycelia, with the co-location of antibiotic production 27. Transcriptomics analysis has also shown the activity of developmental genes in pellets of S.
coelicolor, even though sporulation is absent in liquid grown cultures 28. Recently we discovered a novel locus encompassing the matA and matB genes, which likely encode biosynthetic enzymes for an extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) and are also required for pellet formation 29. Deletion of matAB results in a submerged morphology strikingly similar to that of cslA mutants 29. Both loci are also required for spore aggregation, which contributes to the size heterogeneity of mycelia in liquid-grown cultures 30. In this study we show that the product of MatAB is a major component of the extracellular matrix and identify the exo-polysaccharide as poly-β-1,6-N-acetylglucosamine (PNAG). Attachment assays show that PNAG plays a different function in aggregation than the cellulose-like EPS produced by CslA/GlxA. The results are a major step forward in understanding how the extracellular matrix of Streptomyces facilitates adhesion and how it controls morphogenesis during submerged cultivation.