Introduction Streptomyces antibioticus IMRU 3720 produces a mixture of actinomycins (Acms), designated as actinomycin X (Acm X).1 Acms are chromopeptides consisting of two pentapeptide lactone rings attached in amide linkage to 2-amino-phenoxazine-3-on-4,6-dimethyl-1,9-dicarboxylic acid (actinocin; Figure 1). Members of the Acm X mixture differ from each other by substitutions in the “proline” site of their β-pentapeptide lactone rings.2–4 Thus, Acm X2 contains a 4-oxo-proline residue whereas Acm X1 and Acm X0 contain a proline or a 4-trans-hydroxyproline, respectively.5 In contrast, members of the Acm C complex produced by Streptomyces anulatus var. chrysomallus ATCC 11523 (designated Streptomyces chrysomallus) and its relatives vary exclusively in the “d-valine” sites of their pentapeptide lactone rings by substitution of one or both d-valine residue with d-allo-isoleucine giving Acm C2 and Acm C3, respectively (Figure 1).5–7 Acm X and Acm C (and also Acm C1 [syn. D] produced by Streptomyces parvulus as an alone-standing Acm) are the preferred types of Acms formed in streptomycetes.5 Strains producing Acms of the Z, F, G and Y type are less frequent.6,8,9 Typically, these latter mixtures are produced in low yield in line with their more complicated structures compared to Acm X and Acm C.9 Initial in vivo studies of Acm biosynthesis in S. antibioticus and S. chrysomallus indicated differences in the physiology of formation.5,10–12 Later enzymatic studies performed in S. antibioticus revealed the presence of an enzyme phenoxazinone synthase (PHS), which is not expressed in S. chrysomallus (or S. parvulus).13–17 Its coordinate expression and regulation with Acm X biosynthesis in S. antibioticus indicated its role in the formation of the phenoxazinone chromophore of Acm.13–15 Since S. antibioticus proved to be a difficult source to isolate new Acm biosynthetic enzymes, the focus of Acm biosynthesis research turned onto S. chrysomallus (and to a lesser extent to S. parvulus), from which enzymes were characterized involved in formation of the chromophore precursor 3-hydroxy-4-methylanthranilic acid (4-MHA) or the actinomycin synthetases (ACMSs) involved in the nonribosomal assembly of the half molecule precursors of Acms (Acm halves).18–26 Based on their protein sequences, the acm C biosynthetic gene cluster of S. chrysomallus was cloned.27 Its genetic and biochemical analysis together with the previous enzymatic data allowed to draw a detailed picture of Acm biosynthesis (Figure 2). Remarkably, the acm C biosynthetic gene cluster of S. chrysomallus has a palindromic appearance by the presence of two invertedly oriented arms flanking the peptide synthetase genes and their cohorts in the center. Each arm contained orthologous sets of genes (but not all) from the other arm and in the same arrangement. It was assumed that this was the result of a previous duplication of a simpler version (minimal) acm gene cluster with subsequent rearrangements and deletions, which also may explain loss of a 3-kynurenine monooxygenase gene necessary for 4-MHA synthesis or the gene encoding a phenoloxidase responsible for condensation of Acm halves in the last step of Acm biosynthesis (Figure 2).28 However, the duplication model was hampered by the presence of two additional genes embedded in the extra arm but both absent in the principal arm, which precluded to deduce how the minimal acm cluster looked like. In view of the considerable amount of data available on Acm X biosynthesis in S. antibioticus, we decided to clone the acm X biosynthetic gene cluster and compare its structure with the acm C biosynthetic gene cluster in S. chrysomallus. To this end, we sequenced the genome of both S. antibioticus and S. chrysomallus.