INTRODUCTION The phytopathogen Dickeya zeae can cause severe infections on both dicotyledonous and monocotyledonous plants (1). Similar to other species in the Dickeya genus, the virulence of D. zeae is linked to cell motility, biofilm formation, and production of cell wall-degrading enzymes (1–3), except that D. zeae also produces a family of phytotoxins, known as zeamines (4, 5). Zeamines are a family of structurally related polyamino compounds that play important roles in the pathogenicity of D. zeae EC1. Inactivation of zmsA, the key gene responsible for the biosynthesis of all zeamine compounds, abrogated the infectivity of D. zeae EC1 on rice, potato, and Chinese cabbage (4). Zeamines are produced by Dickeya species and Serratia plymuthica strains with the zms gene cluster, including D. zeae EC1 and S. plymuthica RVH1 (4–9). Among them, zeamine, zeamine I, and prezeamines are the derivatives of a polyamino chain zeamine II, with polyketide moiety conjugating at the terminal amino group of zeamine II (4–7, 9). Apart from their important role in the virulence of D. zeae EC1, zeamines are also potent antibiotics with broad-spectrum activity against various organisms, including multidrug-resistant bacteria, fungi, oomycetes, and nematodes (8–10). Evidence shows that zeamines target the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria in a way reminiscent of the cationic antimicrobial peptide polymyxin B (11). Organization of the zms gene clusters is genetically well conserved in D. zeae EC1 and S. plymuthica RVH1, with genes encoding polyketide synthases (PKSs), nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs), and fatty acid synthases (FASs). In addition, five genes within the zms gene cluster were predicted to encode transporter proteins, including four encoding putative ATPases and permeases associated with the ABC transporter system and one encoding a potential HlyD superfamily protein (6, 8, 12). One of the predicted ABC transport systems encoded by zmn20 and zmn21 was proposed to be a zeamine transporter and associated with zeamine resistance in S. plymuthica RVH1 (6), but this speculation has not yet been validated experimentally. Multidrug resistance (MDR) efflux pumps are membrane-associated proteins that can export a wide range of antibiotics and confer intrinsic antibiotic-resistant ability to bacteria. The efflux pumps can be classified into five superfamilies: MFS (major facilitator superfamily), ABC (ATP-binding cassette), SMR (small multidrug resistance), MATE (multidrug and toxic compound extrusion), and RND (resistance-nodulation-cell division) (13). In Gram-negative bacteria, RND efflux pumps play important roles in MDR due to their broad-spectrum substrate profile (14). The RND efflux pump is a tripartite complex system comprised of an outer membrane channel, an adaptor, and an inner membrane protein, all of which are required for the full function of antibiotic transportation (15). The genes responsible for encoding RND efflux pumps are commonly presented as a single operon in bacteria, like the MexAB-OprM efflux pump in Pseudomonas aeruginosa (16), but there are also exceptional cases with the gene encoding outer membrane channel protein placed in another location in the genome (17). In RND efflux pumps, antibiotic specificity is determined by the inner membrane protein. Antibiotics belonging to different families can enter into the inner membrane proteins through three putative entrance channels opening to the central cavity of inner membrane protein, the inner membrane, and periplasmic space of bacterial cells (18). The multiple active binding sites in the porter region of inner membrane proteins make it possible for the RND efflux pumps to transport a variety of structurally unrelated antibiotics produced by bacteria themselves (19) or from the environment (20, 21). How D. zeae EC1 protects itself from the antimicrobial activity of zeamines remains unknown. While the MICs of zeamines for most bacterial pathogens are low, in the range of 0.3 to 10 μg/ml (9), our preliminary assay results showed that the zeamine producer D. zeae EC1 could tolerate up to 1,800 μg/ml of zeamines, suggesting a high-level resistance mechanism(s) is encoded by the D. zeae EC1 genome. In this study, we tested whether the transporter genes within the zms gene cluster, which were speculated to play roles in zeamine resistance (6), and the adjacent genes encoding RND efflux pump are associated with zeamine resistance in D. zeae EC1. Our results rule out the possible involvement of the ABC transporter genes within the zms gene cluster in zeamine resistance but lead to identification of a RND efflux pump, DesABC, that confers a high level of zeamine tolerance in D. zeae EC1. Substrate specificity assay against a range of antibiotics showed that DesABC appeared to only confer resistance against zeamines. In addition, the DesABC efflux system was found to be functionally conserved in Dickeya species. Interestingly, consistent with the zeamine-specific pattern of DesABC, we found that the transcriptional expression of its coding genes, desAB, was stimulated by the presence of zeamines, suggesting that DesABC co-evolved with the genes encoding zeamine biosynthesis to ensure high-level production of the antibiotics.