Introduction Base methylation is a DNA modification present in all kingdoms of life, including bacteria. The methylation of cytosines is an important epigenetic mark, well known in higher eukaryotes to control transcriptional regulation that can cause repression or activation of gene expression. The correct inheritance of epigenetic patterns is crucial to cell processes while atypical DNA methylation is linked to numerous diseases, disorders and abnormalities1,2. DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt1) and UHRF1 (ubiquitin-like, containing PHD and RING finger domains) are recognized as the main players in the preservation of DNA methylation in mammals. In bacteria the majority of DNA methyltransferases described are part of restriction-modification (RM) systems. A RM system consists of a restriction endonuclease and a DNA (adenine or cytosine) methyltransferase. Usually, base methylation protects host DNA from DNA cleavage by the associated endonuclease. ‘Orphan’ DNA methyltransferase genes can be found in many bacterial genomes and probably derive from ancestral RM systems that lost the cognate restriction enzyme. Additional roles in regulating several important cellular processes, such as initiation of DNA replication, DNA repair and gene regulation, were proposed for bacterial adenine methyltransferases3–8. The most famous examples are the adenine DNA methyltransferases Dam and CcrM. In Escherichia coli Dam is important for gene expression as well as other cellular processes, like DNA replication initiation and DNA repair9–11. In Caulobacter crescentus and other Alphaproteobacteria CcrM is essential to regulate gene expression and controls more than 10% of the genes necessary for its cell cycle progression12. Recently, roles in regulating gene expression were also given to orphan cytosine methyltransferases of Helicobacter pylori and E. coli. In H. pylori an orphan cytosine methyltransferase influences the expression of genes involved in motility, adhesion, and virulence13. In E. coli, the Dcm cytosine methyltransferase controls the expression of two ribosomal protein genes, the drug resistance transporter gene sugE at early stationary phase10,14,15 and the expression of genes associated with stationary phase16. 5-azacytidine (5-azaC) and 5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) are cytosine DNA methylation inhibitors routinely used to demethylate DNA in a variety of eukaryotes to assess the consequences of cytosine DNA methylation loss17,18. They are nucleoside analogs that are converted intracellularly to the corresponding 5′-triphosphates upon cell entry; 5-azaC is incorporated into both RNA and DNA, whereas 5-aza-dC only into DNA18–22. When these analogues are incorporated, cytosine-5 DNA-dependent cytosine methyltransferases are locked on the DNA and inhibited with the consequence of decreased 5-methylcytosines in newly replicated DNA20,21. Recently, 5-azaC use was applied to E. coli where it was found to modulate transcriptome23. Streptomycetes are Gram positive soil bacteria with CG rich genomes (70%). They are industrially very important because they produce two thirds of all clinically relevant secondary metabolites24. Streptomyces coelicolor A(3)2 strain M145 is the best-known species of the Streptomyces genus at both genetic and molecular level25–27 and it has long been considered as the model streptomycete for studying physiological (antibiotic production) and morphological differentiation. S. coelicolor A(3)2 M145 produces three well characterised antibiotics (actinorhodin, blue pigment, Act; undecylprodigiosin, red pigment, Red; calcium-dependent lipopeptide antibiotic, CDA), and has been described to encode for up to 30 additional secondary metabolites28. S. coelicolor M145 exhibits a complex developmental cycle that includes sporulation and developmentally associated programmed cell death29,30. In a solid culture (i.e. GYM) five different cell types are sequentially produced: the unigenomic spores, the first mycelium (MI), the second mycelium (MII), aerial cells and sporulating cells. After spore germination, a viable vegetative mycelium grows on the surface and within the agar matrix forming the first compartmentalized mycelium that undergoes a highly ordered PCD. The remaining viable segments of these hyphae enlarge and form the second multinucleated mycelium MII that comprises (i) the MII substrate that grows within the agar matrix, (ii) the aerial MII characterized by hydrophobic layers and (iii) the sporulating MII, which undergoes a second round of PCD followed by spore formation. S. coelicolor life cycle is regulated at different levels by extracellular signals and quorum sensing-related factors, multiple master regulators, and biochemical pathways, such as bald, white and sky27,31,32, but little is known regarding the effect of DNA methylation controlling differentiation. S. coelicolor M145 has a stringent type IV restriction-modification system that cleaves exogenous methylated DNA, and for its successful transformation it is first necessary to demethylate DNA constructs in a dam−
dcm− mutant strain of E. coli33. Recently, an endonuclease that binds to 5-methyl-cytosine containing DNA in all sequence contexts was characterized34. Years ago, the role of DNA methyltransferases in Streptomyces antibioticus and S. coelicolor was investigated by treating the cultures with demethylating agents and it was found that methylation could influence development and differentiation35–37. In this study, we investigated whether S. coelicolor M145 genome undergoes differential DNA cytosine methylation during the growth cycle and whether treatment with a demethylating agent (5-aza-dC) could affect growth and differentiation. We found that DNA cytosine methylation is modulated during development and that demethylation impairs morphological differentiation and actinorhodin production. Thus, we searched for DNA methyltransferase genes in the genome and constructed a mutant in a putative DNA methyltransferase gene. Our data showed that in the SCO1731::Tn5062 strain, methylation levels decreased and growth and differentiation were delayed, similarly to the effects caused by the treatment of S. coelicolor M145 with the demethylating agent. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that demonstrates the involvement of cytosine methylation in the control of morphological and physiological differentiation in this microorganism.