Introduction Antibiotic producing bacteria that produce toxic agents can develop and employ resistance mechanisms to survive the effects of their products; several major defensive strategies have come to light and these include: efflux pumps, chemical modifications, prodrugs, compound sequestration, subcellular localization, and target modifications/self-resistant protein variants1. Anthracycline antibiotics are effective agents in the treatment of various cancers despite their cumulative cardiotoxicity2. These compounds consist of a linear tetracyclic polyketide backbone and most are hydroxylated or glycosylated at the C-7 position. Naturally occurring C-7 reduced anthracycline antibiotics are relatively rare (Supplementary Fig. 1). A total of 14 anthracycline antibiotics were purified from marine-derived Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 16663. To our surprise, five C-7 deoxyanthracycline antibiotics, cytorhodins X (1) and Y (2), cosmomycins A (3) and B (4), and iremycin (5)3–7 (Fig. 1) were identified as major products. Previous reports indicated that deoxyanthracyclines generally show reduced toxicity relative to their C-7 glycosylated counterparts8. Compounds 1–10 (Fig. 1) were found to be mycelium-associated whereas fermentation broth supernatants contain less than 5% of the total amount of anthracyclines formed. However, the mechanism that explains the producer’s self-resistance to toxic DNA-intercalating agents remains unknown. Our observations here suggest that possible resistance mechanisms likely exist in Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1666. Previous investigations into C-7 reduction have mainly focused on exogenous degradation aspects such as: degradation by mammalian tissue preparations9, bacterial bioconversion/degradation10,11, rat liver microsomal NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase, xanthine oxidase, cytochrome C reductase, and DT-diaphorase-mediated enzymatic reactions in vitro12. Microbial conversions of anthracycline antibiotics by bacterial strains (Aeromonas hydrophila, Citrobacter freundii, and Escherichia coli) suggest that these reactions are NADH-dependent and require anaerobic or semi-anaerobic conditions10,13. Recently, a pair of enzymes, KstA15 and KstA16 that oxidize the C-1 position of aklavinone from the kosinostatin biosynthetic pathway was identified. Additionally, and somewhat surprisingly, the KstA15/KstA16 pair was also found to catalyze elimination of hydroxyl or glycosyl moieties at the aklavinone C-7 position to afford the shunt product 7-deoxyaklavinone under anaerobic conditions14.Fig. 1Characterization of the deglycosylation step involved in cytorhodin biosynthesis.a The gene locations of cytA in the cyt gene cluster. b
cytA and its homologues locations in their respective gene clusters cyt, cin, acl, and niv from Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1666, Streptomyces sp. SPB74, Streptomyces galilaeus, and Streptomyces niveus LS2151. c HPLC analysis of fermentation broths from (i) mutant strain ∆cytA; (ii) mutant strain ∆cytA supplemented with 3% XAD-16 resin; (iii) the WT strain Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1666/ΔtrdA1DH; d Chemical structures of anthracyclines and their aglycones from Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1666. cytA and its putative homologs are shaded in red; The captured partial cos BGC is shaded in the dotted box. Arrows highlighted in red represented cytA and its homologues; arrows highlighted in blue represented cytB and its homologues. Fig. 1Characterization of the deglycosylation step involved in cytorhodin biosynthesis.a The gene locations of cytA in the cyt gene cluster. b
cytA and its homologues locations in their respective gene clusters cyt, cin, acl, and niv from Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1666, Streptomyces sp. SPB74, Streptomyces galilaeus, and Streptomyces niveus LS2151. c HPLC analysis of fermentation broths from (i) mutant strain ∆cytA; (ii) mutant strain ∆cytA supplemented with 3% XAD-16 resin; (iii) the WT strain Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1666/ΔtrdA1DH; d Chemical structures of anthracyclines and their aglycones from Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1666. cytA and its putative homologs are shaded in red; The captured partial cos BGC is shaded in the dotted box. Arrows highlighted in red represented cytA and its homologues; arrows highlighted in blue represented cytB and its homologues. Characterization of the deglycosylation step involved in cytorhodin biosynthesis. a The gene locations of cytA in the cyt gene cluster. b
cytA and its homologues locations in their respective gene clusters cyt, cin, acl, and niv from Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1666, Streptomyces sp. SPB74, Streptomyces galilaeus, and Streptomyces niveus LS2151. c HPLC analysis of fermentation broths from (i) mutant strain ∆cytA; (ii) mutant strain ∆cytA supplemented with 3% XAD-16 resin; (iii) the WT strain Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1666/ΔtrdA1DH; d Chemical structures of anthracyclines and their aglycones from Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1666. cytA and its putative homologs are shaded in red; The captured partial cos BGC is shaded in the dotted box. Arrows highlighted in red represented cytA and its homologues; arrows highlighted in blue represented cytB and its homologues. We have characterized the cytorhodin gene cluster (cyt) and elucidated three glycosyltransferases (GTs) involved in tailoring steps from Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 16663. As indicated, the cyt cluster shows high similarity on the amino acid sequence level (>80% amino acid identity, Supplementary Table 1) to that of cosmomycin D gene cluster (cos). Cosmomycin D is decorated with trisaccharide chains at both C-7 and C-10 positions15 although some key structural differences differentiate the two classes of anthracyclines. The disparity in C-7 oxidation states and substitution patterns between cosmomycin D and cytorhodins X and Y inspired us to hypothesize that an enzymatic process might coordinate formation of the latter. We report here the discovery of CytA, an essential reductase involved in C-7 reduction during the biosynthesis of cytorhodin, a representative anthracycline antibiotic. CytA alone is sufficient to catalyze C-7 reduction under anaerobic conditions and is able to convert clinically employed anthracycline drugs to their inactive, and thereby nontoxic variants. We posit that this unique enzyme and its catalytic chemistry constitute a previously unrecognized resistance mechanism by which Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1666 defends itself from anthracycline toxicities.