INTRODUCTION The tunicamycins are fatty acyl nucleoside antibiotics produced by several actinomycetes, mostly Streptomyces species, including Streptomyces chartreusis (1, 2). They consist of a unique 11-carbon core (tunicamine) decorated with uracil, N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), and variable fatty acyl moieties (Fig. 1). They are potent inhibitors of cell wall biosynthesis in Gram-positive bacteria, where they target MraY, which is required for the production of the peptidoglycan precursor Lipid I (3, 4), and TarO, MnaA, and Cap5P, which are involved in teichoic acid biosynthesis (5). They also inhibit protein N-glycosylation in eukaryotes (6), targeting dolichyl-phosphate alpha-N-acetyl-glucosaminyl-phosphotransferase (DPAGT1, also known as GlcNAc-1-P transferase) and resulting in severe toxicity. While the bacterial (e.g., MraY) and human (DPAGT1) targets are similar, in principle, it may be possible to design tunicamycin variants that specifically inhibit the bacterial proteins. A better understanding of tunicamycin biosynthesis and of the genes responsible for the individual steps in its production could play an important role in the delivery of such analogues. In an earlier work, we cloned and sequenced the tunicamycin biosynthetic gene cluster (tun) from S. chartreusis, expressed it heterologously in Streptomyces coelicolor, and proposed a biosynthetic pathway based largely on homology of the encoded gene products with proteins of known function (7). The cluster contains 14 genes, tunA to tunN, with many apparently translationally coupled to the preceding gene (Fig. 1). Subsequent in vitro studies of TunA and TunF combined with the deletion of tunB provided experimental evidence for their specific roles in tunicamycin biosynthesis (8). Here, we report mutational analyses of the other 13 genes in the tun cluster, which, together with transcriptional characterizations, provide new insights into tunicamycin biosynthesis and immunity. FIG 1(Top) Structures of the tunicamycins. (Bottom) The tunicamycin biosynthetic gene cluster, showing the size of the intergenic regions (in bp) and the approximate location of the tun p1 and p2 promoters. The results of each of the reverse transcription (RT)-PCRs are shown below the corresponding intergenic region. Left lane, pIJ12003a DNA template; center lane, +RT; and right lane, −RT (control for DNA contamination). (Top) Structures of the tunicamycins. (Bottom) The tunicamycin biosynthetic gene cluster, showing the size of the intergenic regions (in bp) and the approximate location of the tun p1 and p2 promoters. The results of each of the reverse transcription (RT)-PCRs are shown below the corresponding intergenic region. Left lane, pIJ12003a DNA template; center lane, +RT; and right lane, −RT (control for DNA contamination).