Introduction In recent decades, lung cancer has become the most common malignant disease with the highest incidence and mortality rate in China and even the whole world, which poses a serious threat to human health. In 2016 Lachgar A et al
1 found that over 60% of lung cancer patients present with locally advanced or metastatic disease (stage III or IV) at the time of diagnosis, during this period that surgical resection may not be an option. Therefore, until recently, conventional chemotherapy and radiation therapy were the main types of treatments for lung cancer patients 2. However drug resistance in chemotherapy for lung cancer is complex and these mechanisms are not clarified yet, which seriously affects patients' clinical treatment effect and cause a very poor prognosis. Over the past few decades, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC) were the most common classification of diagnosing lung cancer. This way doesn't require further morphological sub classification because of the limited treatment options. NSCLC comprises approximately 80%-85% of all lung cancers including adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma 2, 3. Thus NSCLC becomes the focus of studying lung cancer resistance mechanisms. Nowadays there are several mechanisms of lung cancer drug-resistance mentioned in various literatures. In 2015 Wang et al found EGFR self-resistance mutation, T790M second mutation and the activation of the PI3K/AKT signal pathways 4. In 2007 Lim et al found that gene of phosphate and tension homology deleted on chromosome ten (PTEN) mutations and Axl overexpression 5. In 2005 Pao et al found that kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene (KRAS), v-raf murine asrcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER-2) mutations 6. In 2007 Engelman found that mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) factor proto oncogene amplification and overexpression of protein 7. There are also some mechanisms concerned with signal pathways. For example, in 2014 Wu found that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) cell growth related to the deletion of signal pathways 8. Most of the above-mentioned mechanisms of lung cancer resistance are related to gene mutation, deletion and amplification. In addition to the above-mentioned lung cancer resistance mechanisms, there are other lung cancer resistance mechanisms involving pharmacokinetics and multidrug resistance genes, such as the following aspects. i) In 2016 Wei et al found that membrane transporter-mediated drug efflux pump mechanism, as the most common mechanism, which can reduce intracellular drug accumulation. This mechanism involves overexpressed membrane protein with efflux pump, such as ABC family member P-glycoprotein (P-gp), multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP), lung resistance-related protein (LRP) and so on 9. ii) Intracellular abnormal enzyme system can be combined with a variety of chemotherapeutic drugs, which reduces drug activity, or enhances the DNA repair ability of tumor cells, and prevent the damage of chemotherapeutic drugs to the tumor cells 10. These intracellular abnormal enzymes are overexpressed topoisomerase, glutamyl transpeptidase, O6-methyguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) and so on. iii) In 2015 Javid et al found that anti-apoptotic effect of cells is enhanced, such as over-expression of anti-apoptotic genes bcl-2 and c-myc, which makes tumor cells less susceptible to apoptosis 11. The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a member of a family of four closely related receptors: EGFR (or erbB1), HER2/neu (erbB2), HER3 (erbB3) and HER4 (erbB4) 12. Approximately 50% of Asian patients with NSCLC have EGFR mutations 13. Patients with sensitizing mutations of EGFR, compared to conventional chemotherapy, these targeted therapy, such as epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) have achieved huge success and became one of the standard treatment-regimes for NSCLC. However, patients ultimately develop resistance to these drugs, even though EGFR-TKIs have been established as the standard therapy for EGFR-sensitizing mutant advanced NSCLC clinically 14, 15. According to the current mechanisms of lung cancer resistance, researchers have classified them into two categories: primary and acquired resistance. The primary resistance is defined as the failure to respond to the treatments at the first time after receiving EGFR-TKIs and presents no obvious improvement in symptoms, disease control or overall survival. Approximately 85% of all primary lung cancers are NSCLC. While some patients with activating EGFR mutations who are initially responsive to EGFR TKIs very well at firstly, eventually would be developed acquired resistance after a complete or partial response or ≥ 6 months of stable disease after treatment with a targeted therapy 16. Strategies to overcome these intrinsic and acquired resistance mechanisms are complex. Thus studies on the lung cancer drug resistance are extremely important in order to define the best treatment strategy. MicroRNAs (miRNAs, miRs) are a class of small endogenous single strand non-coded RNA, about 19-25 nt, found in eukaryotes, and have the function of regulating after gene transcription 15. MicroRNAs' regulation mechanism is that the longer miRNAs primary transcript produces mature miRNAs through a series of nuclease shear processing. Then these mature miRNAs are assembled into the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). Then mature miRNAs recognize and combine the target genes or the target mRNAs' 3' terminal non translation region (UTR) by complementary pairing of bases. The RISC will conduct the process of mRNAs' degradation or inhibition of their translations. MiRNAs and target mRNAs combined incompletely can inhibit the expression of mRNAs at the level of protein translation. While when they may complement each other completely (or almost completely complementary), which can degrade the target mRNAs degradation and change the expression level of the target protein, then achieve the regulatory effect 17. In 2016 Ren et al found that miRNAs can regulate a variety of target genes or one kind of miRNAs can be regulated by various genes 18. In particular, in 2006 George et al found that abnormal expression of miRNAs is probably one of the causes of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) underlying mechanisms of primary resistance 19. In 2016 Thomas et al also found that several miRNAs can increase the therapeutic efficiency of EFGR-TKIs by regulating the drug sensitivity of cancer cells 20. From the above literatures, it can be seen that miRNAs may play an important role in the treatment of lung cancer by regulating genes' expression, or by affecting the efficacy of drugs. Therefore, this article mainly reviews the role of miRNAs in several lung cancer resistance mechanisms based on recent literatures.