1. Introduction Cercosporoid fungi (formerly Cercospora s. lat., sensu Chupp, 1954) belong to the Mycosphaerellaceae (Capnodiales, Ascomycota) and are represented by genera and species similar to the genus Cercospora. The affiliation of genera within this group of fungi has been problematic for a long time. Sixteen years ago, Crous and Braun [1] distinguished four true cercosporoid genera, i.e., Cercospora Fresen., Passalora Fr., Pseudocercospora Speg., and Stenella Syd., as well as several others that are morphologically similar (e.g., Cladosporiella, Phacelium, Phaeoisariopsis, Stigmina, Thedgonia). Since that time, extensive analysis of phenotypic characters as well as phylogenetic studies have led to a change in this taxonomic concept, and the genus Zasmidium s. str. has been assigned to cercosporoids instead of Stenella [2,3]. Based on their morphological characteristics and life cycle, the cercosporoids comprise holoblastic asexual morphs, asexual holomorphs, and at least partly mycosphaerella-like sexual morphs [1,3,4]. However, the sexual stage has not been reported for most cercosporoid species, which is associated with the loss of the ability to form sexual morphs (Figure 1) [4,5,6]. Including those that do form sexual morphs, the group should be classified as hemibiotrophs (facultative saprotrophs), i.e., asexual (anamorphic) stages are parasites (biotrophs), while sexual (teleomorphic) forms develop on dead plant remains (as necrotrophs). This indicates that they can complete their life cycles on the dead tissue of leaf spots that they have caused themselves [7]. Cercosporoid fungi represent one of the largest and most important groups of plant pathogenic fungi that cause leaf spots. They comprise economically relevant species causing diseases on a wide range of plants (i.e., dicots, monocots, some gymnosperms, and ferns), including numerous cultivated plants on almost every continent. Although widespread, the cercosporoid species exhibit especially high diversity in tropical and subtropical areas of Africa, Asia, Australia, and Central to South America [3,4]. The most important and often best known and examined diseases caused by cercosporoid fungi include leaf spot of sugar beet (Cercospora beticola), celery (Cercospora apii), grapevine (Pseudocercospora vitis), angular leaf spot of bean (Pseudocercospora griseola), black leaf streak of banana (Pseudocercospora fijiensis), and leaf spots on many other hosts [4,7]. Symptoms of cercosporoid diseases are usually visible as leaf spots, mostly with a distinct darker margin or they are vein-limited. Within the spots, diagnostic structures (conidiophores and conidia) are produced. These fungi form macronematous conidiophores singly, in fascicles, sporodochia or synnemata, hyaline or pigmented, with terminally or intercalary integrated conidiogenous cells, holoblastic conidiogenesis, percurrent to sympodial proliferation. Conidia are formed singly or in acropetal chains, and they are amero- to scolecosporous and hyaline or pigmented [1,4,7]. Since the genus Cercospora was first described, its taxonomy as well as assignment of individual species to this group has been problematic. Although morphological traits are frequently used to identify newly isolated fungi, it is not possible to distinguish Cercospora spp. based exclusively on the characteristics of morphological asexual reproductive structures. Enormous taxonomic progress has been made in the last few decades with the application of molecular methods in capnodealean fungi, including Mycosphaerellaceae [5,8,9,10,11]. Symptoms of infection and morphological characters in vivo (characters associated with the fungi on their host plants in nature) are still important in diagnosis of pathogenic fungi, not only for monitoring and identification, but also for understanding their ecology, taxonomy, and economic importance. Molecular techniques are used to overcome taxonomic problems posed by the limitations of morphological characteristics. In turn, the classification of fungi is mainly based on a combination of morphological characteristics, host specificity, and molecular analyses [12,13]. Currently only a limited number of cercosporoid fungi have been cultivated in laboratory conditions, and hundreds of taxa are only known from in vivo analysis and their morphological characters [3]. Therefore, only a limited number of their genes have so far been sequenced and analyzed. The growing number of DNA sequences of cercosporoid fungi provides better insights into the phylogenetic structure of this fungal group at the familial and generic levels. However, there is still a need for further data supplementing current knowledge [3]. In the taxonomic context, the developing molecular analyses have been used in studies of e.g., Cercospora apii s. lat. recognized by Crous and Braun [1], and attempts have been made to separate or order the species included therein. The species in this complex that are morphologically indistinguishable from C. apii s. str. could not be separated using only the internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) and the 5.8S ribosomal (r)RNA gene [14]. However, using the recent eight-gene analysis (ITS, translation elongation factor 1-alpha (tef1) actin (actA), calmodulin (cmdA), histone H3 (his3), β-tubulin (tub2), RNA polymerase II gene (rpb2), and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gapdh)), it has been possible to separate species grouped in C. apii s. lat. that occur on different unrelated plant families [13]. It was first thought that the species within cercosporoids are host specific at the level of the plant genus or family, a concept that led to describing a large number of different species. It is now recognized, for example for C. apii Fresen., that some of the species present on diverse hosts are indistinguishable and are the same species [15,16].