INTRODUCTION Fungal natural products (secondary metabolites) are an invaluable source of inspiration for pharmaceuticals that act against myriad conditions, including infectious diseases, cancer, and hyperlipidemia (1–4). Indeed, the antibiotics penicillin and cephalosporin, the cholesterol-lowering lovastatin, and the immunosuppressant cyclosporine are derived from fungi (5, 6), and the reservoir of novel scaffolds continues to grow each year (7). Although numerous drugs derived from fungi exist on the market today, genome sequencing has revealed that fungi possess the biosynthetic capacity to produce a far greater number of secondary metabolites than currently accessed (8). Recent studies spanning nearly 600 fungal genomes suggest that a mere 3% of molecules encoded by fungal biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) have been explored (8). To access this biosynthetic potential, an innovative discovery pipeline was recently developed to systematically annotate the biosynthetic abilities of fungi using comparative metabolomics and heterologous gene expression (9–12). With this platform, fungal genomic DNA fragments containing intact BGCs are inserted into fungal artificial chromosomes (FACs) and are used to transform a fungal host to discover new chemical scaffolds (10–12). This pipeline uses a metabolite scoring system to identify heterologously expressed metabolites from the thousands of signals originating from the host. By enabling facile linkage between secondary metabolites and their corresponding BGCs, the FAC-metabolite scoring pipeline facilitates prioritization of target compounds most likely to contain novel scaffolds. Using structural clues provided by BGC data, it is possible to target compounds originating from BGCs containing unusual biosynthetic machinery (Fig. 1). FIG 1The fungal artificial chromosome (FAC)-metabolite scoring platform for discovering fungal secondary metabolites originating from unusual biosynthetic gene clusters. The fungal artificial chromosome (FAC)-metabolite scoring platform for discovering fungal secondary metabolites originating from unusual biosynthetic gene clusters. Aromatic amino acids are fundamental for growth and development across phylogenetic kingdoms. Additionally, catabolism of aromatic amino acids leads to the production of nonproteinogenic amino acids, such as the tryptophan-derived kynurenine, which regulates inflammation and immune responses (13, 14). Kynurenine and its derivatives are biosynthetic intermediates of numerous secondary metabolites, including sibiromycin (15), mycemycin C (16), nidulanin A (17), nidulanin B and nidulanin D (18), daptomycin (19), and quinomycin peptide antibiotics (20). Recently, the malpikynines were discovered from Mortierella alpina as degradation products of the fungal surfactant malpinins, resulting from an oxidative conversion of tryptophan into kynurenine (21). Incorporation of kynurenine into secondary metabolites enables differential specificity toward enzyme receptors and targets (22). Daptomycin, for example, shows decreased antimicrobial efficacy when kynurenine is mutated to tryptophan (23, 24). One tactic for creating secondary metabolites with novel scaffolds is to recruit primary metabolic enzymes that modify common precursors into nonproteinogenic precursors into BGCs (20). For example, a tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) gene located adjacent to the daptomycin-producing nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) gene encodes an enzyme that supplies the kynurenine for daptomycin synthesis. This TDO diverges from related proteins in the same genus (29% sequence identity), suggesting it is a paralogous enzyme dedicated to secondary metabolite biosynthesis (19). In a large-scale analysis of 56 FACs, an unknown metabolite from heterologous expression of a BGC from Aspergillus terreus ATCC 20542 (located on the FAC AtFAC7O19; Fig. 2A; also see Table S1 in the supplemental material) was identified with an m/z value of 310.1188 and a molecular formula of C17H15N3O3 (calculated [M+H]+ mass 310.1192, −0.97 ppm) (10). This compound was found in both the parent strain and the AtFAC7O19-transformed Aspergillus nidulans, but not in the empty vector control. Interestingly, the BGC encoding this metabolite contained an indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), which is involved in tryptophan degradation via kynurenine production (25). While most aspergilli contain three IDOs, A. terreus contains four (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). Given that gene duplication is often utilized as a strategy to “repurpose” genes for secondary metabolism, the presence of this fourth IDO suggested that it may serve to supply kynurenine for the formation of the unknown metabolite. Here, we employ the FAC-metabolite scoring strategy to identify the biosynthetic product of this unusual gene cluster and probe its biosynthesis. FIG 2Proposed terreazepine biosynthetic pathway. (A) The terreazepine biosynthetic gene cluster. (B) Mass spectral shifts of terreazepine following feeding with l-tryptophan-D5 and [13C6]anthranilate. (C) Proposed incorporation of isotope-labeled precursors into terreazepine. (D) Selected ion chromatograms of terreazepine in tzpA domain deletion mutants. (E) Proposed NRPS assembly of terreazepine. It remains unclear whether the final cyclization event can occur from both T2 and T3 domains. Proposed terreazepine biosynthetic pathway. (A) The terreazepine biosynthetic gene cluster. (B) Mass spectral shifts of terreazepine following feeding with l-tryptophan-D5 and [13C6]anthranilate. (C) Proposed incorporation of isotope-labeled precursors into terreazepine. (D) Selected ion chromatograms of terreazepine in tzpA domain deletion mutants. (E) Proposed NRPS assembly of terreazepine. It remains unclear whether the final cyclization event can occur from both T2 and T3 domains. (A) Phylogenetic tree of IDOs in a subset of aspergilli. idoA, idoB, and idoC homologs form distinct clades, as annotated according to reference sequences from A. fumigatus and A. oryzae. Interestingly, tzpB and other duplicated IDOs cluster together and share moderate sequence homology to both idoA and idoB. (B) Average IDO counts in aspergilli. Download FIG S1, PDF file, 0.4 MB. (A) Annotated boundaries of AtFAC7O19 in comparison with the A. terreus NIH2624 reference genome. (B) Primers and oligonucleotides used to produce gene and NRPS domain deletions. Download Table S1, PDF file, 0.2 MB.