Introduction Camptothecin (CPT) is a monoterpenoid indole alkaloid (MIA) originally isolated from Chinese happy tree (Camptotheca acuminata)1. This natural product exhibits potent antitumor activity by inhibiting DNA topoisomerase I1–3. Its two derivatives, namely, topotecan and irinotecan, have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the United States for the treatment of various cancers4. Due to the wide range of targets of CPT derivatives, their clinical demand is continuously increasing. Currently, commercial exploitation of camptothecin largely depends on extraction from natural woody plant resources such as C. acuminata and Nothapodytes foetida4. However, these plants typically show low camptothecin concentrations and are not suitable for modern biotechnological applications due to their long growth cycles. Several attempts have been made to establish robust plant cell culture systems to provide a platform for high CPT production. Among them are hairy-root cultures of Ophiorrhiza pumila, an herbal plant of the Ophiorrhiza genus in the Rubiaceae family. O. pumila produces camptothecin naturally in various organs, such as roots, stems, and leaves5. The O. pumila hairy-root system has been shown to produce up to 0.1–0.2% dry weight of camptothecin6–8. However, to further enhance camptothecin production in O. pumila by biotechnological engineering, it is crucial to fully dissect its biosynthetic pathway and molecular regulatory mechanism. The camptothecin biosynthesis pathway is complex and only partly resolved. Camptothecin biosynthesis uses intermediates of the iridoid and shikimate pathways, which converge to form the molecule strictosidine and then further, via unknown chemical reactions, form camptothecin (Fig. 1)4,9. Strictosidine synthase (OpSTR) catalyzes the condensation of tryptamine and secologanin to form strictosidine, a core intermediate in the camptothecin biosynthesis pathway10. Geraniol-10-hydroxylase (OpG10H) and secologanin synthase (OpSLS), two cytochrome P450 (CYP450) family synthases, are involved in the conversion of geraniol to secologanin in the iridoid pathway8. The cytochrome P450 reductase OpCPR is essential for the activity of OpG10H and OpSLS and plays an important role in electron transfer from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) to cytochrome P4508,10. Tryptophan decarboxylase (OpTDC) catalyzes the conversion of tryptophan to tryptamine in the shikimate pathway5,10. Recent studies have confirmed that camptothecin biosynthesis can be manipulated by targeting these enzymes in metabolic engineering of O. pumila hairy roots. Suppression of OpSLS and OpTDC led to a decrease in camptothecin production in O. pumila hairy roots, thus corroborating their importance in camptothecin biosynthesis11. Manipulation of transgenic hairy-root systems further highlighted the important roles of both OpG10H and OpSLS in camptothecin biosynthesis, as co-overexpression of OpG10H and OpSLS increased camptothecin levels in O. pumila hairy roots8. However, less is known about the molecular regulatory mechanism of camptothecin biosynthesis in O. pumila.Fig. 1Camptothecin biosynthetic pathway in O. pumila.MVA pathway mevalonate pathway, MEP pathway 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate pathway, IPP isopentenyl diphosphate, DMAPP dimethylallyl diphosphate, G10H geraniol-10-hydroxylase, SLS secologanin synthase, CPR cytochrome P450 reductase, TDC tryptophan decarboxylase, STR strictosidine synthase. Three dashed arrows indicate that the biosynthetic pathway is unknown. Fig. 1Camptothecin biosynthetic pathway in O. pumila.MVA pathway mevalonate pathway, MEP pathway 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate pathway, IPP isopentenyl diphosphate, DMAPP dimethylallyl diphosphate, G10H geraniol-10-hydroxylase, SLS secologanin synthase, CPR cytochrome P450 reductase, TDC tryptophan decarboxylase, STR strictosidine synthase. Three dashed arrows indicate that the biosynthetic pathway is unknown. Camptothecin biosynthetic pathway in O. pumila. MVA pathway mevalonate pathway, MEP pathway 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate pathway, IPP isopentenyl diphosphate, DMAPP dimethylallyl diphosphate, G10H geraniol-10-hydroxylase, SLS secologanin synthase, CPR cytochrome P450 reductase, TDC tryptophan decarboxylase, STR strictosidine synthase. Three dashed arrows indicate that the biosynthetic pathway is unknown. WRKY transcription factors (TFs) are one of the largest transcriptional regulator families in plants. They characteristically contain one or two WRKY domains. These domains consist of ~60 amino acid residues and enable DNA binding12–14. The WRKY domain contains a highly conserved WRKYGQK amino acid sequence at its N-terminus and an atypical zinc-finger structure (C2H2 or C2HC) at its C-terminus12,13,15. In plants, WRKY TFs are divided into three groups based on the number of WRKY domains (two WRKY domains in Group I and one in Group II and III) and the structure of the zinc fingers (C2H2 in Group I and II and C2HC in Group III proteins)12,13. The WRKY domains generally recognize and bind to W-box (TTGACT/C) DNA motifs at target regions. Previous studies have shown that WRKY proteins, especially WRKY III subgroup members, are involved in the regulation of biosynthesis and accumulation of plant secondary metabolites in medicinal plants. For example, CrWRKY1, a WRKY III subgroup TF, has a positive regulatory effect on the biosynthesis of monoterpenoid indole alkaloids by binding and activating CrTDC in Catharanthus roseus16. In Artemisia annua, the WRKY III subgroup protein AaWRKY1 was reported to positively regulate artemisinin biosynthesis by promoting the transcription of AaADS, AaCYP71AV1 and AaDBR217. In Salvia miltiorrhiza, the WRKY III subgroup member SmWRKY1 was shown to positively regulate tanshinone biosynthesis by activating the SmDXR gene15. WsWRKY1, a WRKY III subgroup TF in Withania somnifera, was shown to positively regulate the biosynthesis of triterpenoids by activating WsSQS and WsSQE18. Recently, two WRKY III subgroup TFs, namely, OpWRKY1 and OpWRKY3, have been implicated in camptothecin biosynthesis in O. pumila hairy roots5,19. OpWRKY1 negatively regulates camptothecin biosynthesis, and OpWRKY3 plays a minor regulatory role in camptothecin production by affecting the development of O. pumila hairy roots and activating the expression of OpCPR5,19. In addition, several TFs from other families have also been reported to be involved in the regulation of camptothecin biosynthesis. OpERF2, an ERF TF family protein, has been isolated and shown to play a positive role in regulating camptothecin biosynthesis20. Moreover, introduction of the MYB TF member OpMYB1 into O. pumila hairy roots reduced camptothecin production21. In C. acuminata, a bZIP transcription factor, CaLMF, is a significant light signaling component and mediates light-regulated camptothecin biosynthesis22. In general, transcriptional regulation plays an important role in the biosynthesis of bioactive metabolites in medicinal plants. In this study, the biosynthesis of camptothecin in O. pumila hairy roots at different growth stages was systematically investigated. By analyzing the expression of all putative WRKY TFs of O. pumila at different growth stages, a single transcription factor, OpWRKY2, was identified as being highly coexpressed with known camptothecin biosynthesis pathway genes. Overexpression of OpWRKY2 in O. pumila hairy roots resulted in increased levels of OpTDC expression as well as camptothecin and tryptamine formation. Accordingly, downregulation of OpWRKY2 reduced OpTDC expression levels and camptothecin production. Biochemical characterization showed that OpWRKY2 binds and activates the promoter of OpTDC in vitro and in vivo. Altogether, our analyses identified a novel regulator of camptothecin biosynthesis and a potential target for advanced bioengineering for enhanced production of an important anticancer drug.