1. Introduction The ongoing emergence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and the concurrent decline in effective treatment options is a severe threat for the human population. If no solutions are provided to arrest the drop in developing new effective drugs, the number of deaths due to AMR was predicted to increase up to 10 million per year in 2050 [1]. This problem is accompanied by the rising evolution of multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria, which are described especially among hard-to-treat pathogens belonging to the ESKAPE group (Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species) [2,3,4]. Gram-negative bacteria such as Enterobacteriaceae, A. baumannii, and P. aeruginosa have been emphasized by the World Health Organization (WHO) as the most critical pathogens for which new treatments need to be prioritized [5]. For past decades, the main source for the development of new pharmaceuticals in general, especially antibiotics, are natural products (NPs) mainly derived from plants, fungi, and bacteria [6]. Among the latter, actinobacteria, in particular Streptomyces spp., represent the most relevant producers of known antibacterial NPs [7,8]. However, the number of new antibacterial compounds isolated from these bacterial producers drops continuously, hampering the future development of novel drug candidates [9,10]. To overcome this shortage, alternative strategies in drug development are applied. The reassessment of already known and effective, but yet neglected NP scaffolds has become a promising route to help fuel the dwindling antibiotic development pipeline [11,12,13]. Chemical and biotechnological approaches such as semisynthesis or genetic engineering, respectively, are applied to modify such molecules, aiming to improve their pharmaceutical properties, antibacterial spectra, and efficacies [14]. Amidochelocardin (2-carboxamido-2-deacetyl-chelocardin, CDCHD; Figure 1) is a promising example of a new lead structure gained by biosynthetic engineering of the bioactive NP chelocardin (CHD; Figure 1), also known as M-319, cetocycline, or cetotetrine [15]. CHD is produced by the actinomycete Amycolatopsis sulphurea and was described in the early 1960s [16]. As a member of the atypical tetracyclines, it exhibits a broad-spectrum antibacterial activity, including the inhibition of species causing urinary tract infections (UTIs), while showing significant differences to the common mode of action of tetracyclines [17,18,19,20]. Importantly, CHD was also shown to inhibit the growth of pathogens carrying different tetracycline resistance genes [21,22], whose widespread mechanisms (e.g., efflux, ribosomal protection, degradation, rRNA mutations) hamper the use of tetracyclines as effective therapeutics [23,24]. The in vivo potency of CHD was already described during the 1970s when it was applied in a small phase II clinical study to treat patients suffering from UTIs, including tetracycline-resistant infections [25]. While the antibacterial spectrum of CHD displays certain activity gaps, e.g., against Pseudomonas spp. [19], these gaps were further closed by generating the more potent lead molecule CDCHD [15]. The chemical space of both compounds has been further extended in recent studies by biosynthetic engineering and medicinal chemistry approaches to explore the structure–activity relationships of these scaffolds [26,27]. In this study, we investigated in detail the in vitro activity of CHD and CDCHD with emphasis on clinically isolated uropathogens, including multidrug-resistant (MDR) strains. For both compounds, a broad-spectrum activity profile was found with most outstanding activities against MDR Enterobacteriaceae, further demonstrating the potential of chelocardins for treatment of UTIs, which are among the most frequent infectious diseases, especially in hospitals, imposing a severe health threat on humans worldwide [29,30]. In parallel, studies on the mechanism of resistance (MoR) revealed even better resistance-breaking properties for CDCHD in comparison to the parent molecule CHD. Development of resistance towards CHD was tested in several bacterial pathogens, but was not detectable except for K. pneumoniae, which exhibited an increased expression of the acrAB-tolC efflux pump genes triggered by mutations in the repressor gene ramR. Intriguingly, while these mutations also induced resistance to several antibiotic classes including tetracyclines, we did not observe any cross-resistance to CDCHD. Indeed, a selection of stable mutants resistant to CDCHD was not feasible under several conditions tested. The absence of evident resistance or very low frequency of resistance (FoR) in pathogens led us to investigate potential self-resistance mechanisms in the natural CHD producer A. sulphurea. Moreover, in this case, we only identified an efflux-based resistance gene, which encodes the ChdR exporter associated with the biosynthetic gene cluster of CHD. These findings underline the strong potential of chelocardins, especially the novel lead CDCHD, to be further developed for future antibacterial therapy.