Introduction The genetic information of eukaryotes and archaea is packaged in the nucleus as a dynamic nucleoprotein chromatin complex that not only stores it efficiently but also allows it to remain readily accessible (Ammar et al., 2012). At the molecular level, the DNA strand wraps approximately 1.65 times around a histone octamer complex, which itself consists of two copies of each of the four core histones (i.e., H2A, H2B, H3, and H4) forming a nucleosome, the fundamental unit of chromatin (McGinty and Tan, 2015). Histones contain an unusually high representation of positively charged lysine and arginine residues that electrostatically interact with the negatively charged phosphodiester backbone of DNA and stabilize the nucleosome core particle (Erler et al., 2014). To regulate the interactions between histones and nucleosomal DNA or transcription factors (TFs), the histone residue side-chains are modified, typically through enzyme-mediated incorporation of metabolite molecules or cofactors, such as acetylation and methylation, and even full proteins, such as ubiquitination and sumoylation (Bannister and Kouzarides, 2011). The resulting plethora of modifications regulate cellular physiology by directly impacting chromatin structure and the pattern of gene expression, including essential enzymes involved in metabolic pathways (Janke et al., 2015). Thereafter, these enzymes can directly influence the epigenetic state of DNA, RNA and histones by balancing the biosynthesis of co-factors that serve as the co-substrates and donors for covalent modifications (e.g., S-adenosyl methionine for methylation and acyl-coenzyme A for acylation), thereby propagating the feedback loop (Fig. 1) (Rinschen et al., 2019).Figure 1The multi-level crosstalk between metabolism and epigenetic regulation of cellular transcription Figure 1The multi-level crosstalk between metabolism and epigenetic regulation of cellular transcription The multi-level crosstalk between metabolism and epigenetic regulation of cellular transcription Beyond enzyme-mediated epigenetic modifications, chemically reactive metabolites have been shown to directly modify nucleotides and histones via spontaneous non-enzymatic reactions (Zheng et al., 2019). Unlike canonical post-translational modifications (PTMs), non-enzymatic covalent modifications (NECMs) accumulate over time and are much more dependent on the cellular microenvironment (Harmel and Fiedler, 2018). Although metabolite-induced NECMs have lower selectivity than enzymatic modifications, histone proteins are particularly susceptible to NECMs due to their long half-lives within cells and disordered, nucleophilic tails (Commerford et al., 1982). Indeed, NECMs have emerged as a new family of chromatin modifications with direct effect on its structure and function. These NECMs have been identified on DNA, RNA and histones and are implicated in disease states; however, their pathophysiological mechanisms, particularly, the presence of any causative relationships, remain elusive (Zheng et al., 2019). In this review, we summarize recent advances in NECM characterization, categorize them based on chemical reactions, and discuss their corresponding functions in disease progression, subsequently providing new perspectives regarding the link between metabolism, diet, and epigenetic regulation.