Introduction Pseudomonads colonize various terrestrial and aquatic environments and associate with diverse hosts including plants, invertebrates and humans1. These bacteria have evolved mechanisms to cope with different stresses inherent to living in these environments. Inter alia, they need to outcompete other contenders to durably establish their presence in the colonized environment. Strains belonging to the Pseudomonas protegens (Pp) or Pseudomonas chlororaphis (Pc) subgroups within the Pseudomonas fluorescens species complex2 typically are highly competitive root colonizers that, however, are also able to establish themselves in contrasting ecological niches, notably in insects3,4. These bacteria are widely studied for their potential use as agricultural inoculants for plant growth promotion, defense priming and protection against pathogens and pest insects5–7. A part of their competitiveness is due to the production of an array of secondary metabolites with broad antimicrobial activities against bacteria, fungal and protist competitors that would fight for common resources8,9. As well as competing against distantly-related organisms, pseudomonads are in competition with kin bacteria, i.e., phylogenetically close relatives, which we consider as strains belonging to the same subgroup in this study. Therefore, they also produce narrow-spectrum toxins, called bacteriocins that typically target close relatives10. These compounds vary greatly in structure and in activity profiles owing to their specificity10. There is some evidence that bacteriocins might shape natural communities of environmental Pseudomonas but the extent of their impact has yet to be defined11,12. Bacteriophages and phage-like particles also exhibit specific activity spectra and have emerged as potent specific weapons against competitors13,14. Indeed, bacteriophages were shown to influence microbiomes through their lysogenic and lytic cycles15,16. For instance, phages may impact species diversity by multiple mechanisms such as reducing the number of highly competitive bacteria (“killing the winner”), releasing nutrients and DNA into the environment and immunizing bacteria against similar viral relatives or equip them with new traits15,17–19. When bacteriophages integrate their genome into bacteria, it may give rise to complex structures such as phage tail-like particles that can be used against other competitors20–22. One of these structures was first discovered in Pseudomonas aeruginosa and was termed pyocin by analogy with colicins23. Similar structures were found in other bacterial species and broadly designated as tailocins22,24 or phage tail-like bacteriocins25. There are two main types of tailocins, R-type and F-type, typified by the P. aeruginosa R-pyocins and F-pyocins, respectively10,23,25. F-tailocins are flexible and non-contractile rod-like structures, whereas R-tailocins are large, rigid and contractile tail-like structures10,23,24. Although F-type and R-type tailocins are thought to be evolutionarily related to phages from the families Siphoviridae and Myoviridae, respectively, these structures are not considered degenerated phages but evolved powerful bacterial weapons24,26. R-tailocins are structurally related to a large family of bacterial contractile injection systems, which comprises the type VI secretion system (T6SS) and phage tail-like insecticidal particles21,27. The genomic loci encoding R-tailocins in pseudomonads specify structural components as well as the regulators and lysis cassette permitting a timely production and release of the particles25,28–31. Conversely, R-tailocin clusters no longer comprise the genes coding for the capsid that encapsulates the phage genomic material and makes a normal phage self-replicative. Analogous to the contractile tail of certain bacteriophages, R-tailocins are composed out of a sheath and a hollow tube forming a long helicoidal hexameric structure that is attached to a baseplate exhibiting multiple tail fibers that appear to direct specificity and permit adsorption to the cell surface of the targeted cell23–25,27,32,33. The contractile tail is thought to cause a dissipation of the membrane potential, leading to the death of the targeted cell25,32,34. The conditions triggering tailocin production naturally are basically unknown. In the laboratory, tailocin assembly can be induced by DNA damage stress provoking the SOS response10,23,25. Tailocin release then appears to be mediated by components of the lysis cassette (holins, lysins and spanin complexes) that degrade the cell wall of the triggered bacterium10,25,30. Environmental Pseudomonas were recently shown to harbor gene clusters encoding R-tailocins28–31. However, there is still very limited knowledge about the activity profiles, the involvement in competition or the production dynamic of these complex phage tail-like particles in environmental pseudomonads. Therefore, in this study, we assessed the diversity of R-tailocins and other phage particles belonging to strains of the Pp and Pc subgroups and related it to their activity spectra within these phylogenetically very closely-related environmental pseudomonads. Then we focused on the type strain of the Pp subgroup, namely CHA0, that is a well-studied model organism for environmental Pseudomonas. For the first time to our knowledge, we visualized the production dynamic of R-tailocins in a bacterial cell and their ejection upon explosive cell lysis. By live cell imaging, we documented competitions involving R-tailocins between two closely-related strains at single-cell level, both in non-induced condition and upon artificial induction, evidencing that this phage tail-related weaponry can play a decisive role in the micro-environment of kin competitors.