1. Introduction Antibiotics are the foundation of modern medicine: they are the reason for the survival of immunocompromised patients and transplant recipients, they support trauma care, as well as implants or prostheses; the whole medical world relies on the possibility to treat infections: without safe and effective antibiotics, indeed, the whole edifice of modern medicine itself will crumble because of the spread of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) [1]. Several interconnected human, animal, and environmental habitats can contribute to the emergence, evolution, and spread of AMR, and it is essential to recognize that the health of people is tightly connected to the health of animals, that diseases are transmitted from humans to animals and vice versa, and that AMR must therefore be tackled in both. Such a perspective also encompasses the environment, which is clearly tied to humans and animals and likewise a potential source of new resistant microorganisms. In addition, antibiotics are often used for nonmedical uses, such as beekeeping, ethanol production, horticulture, in antifouling paints to prevent barnacle build-up on boat hulls, and food preservation [2]. Unfortunately, while society now takes antibiotics for granted, it has been shown that knowledge and attitudes regarding antibiotic use can be, and must be, improved and that improved knowledge may help reduce the misconceptions and misguided expectations contributing to inappropriate antibiotic use [3,4]. The defined “One Health” approach is essential for developing comprehensive and integrative measures to address AMR. This approach should include the surveillance of microbes in humans, animals, and environments to better understand AMR, and to develop effective preventive and control strategies [5]. One Health is defined as a concept of “designing and implementing programs, policies, legislation and research in which multiple sectors communicate and work together to achieve better public health outcomes”. Likewise, it needs to involve the “collaborative effort of multiple health science professions, together with their related disciplines and institutions—working locally, nationally, and globally—to attain optimal health for people, domestic animals, wildlife, plants, and [the] environment” [6]. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge about the three parts that make up our world from the globally expanding threat of AMR.