Introduction In the past several decades, overuse and misuse of antibiotics has led to increased antibiotic resistance which has become a significant public health concern (1). There is no systematic surveillance of antibiotic misuse and no data are available to quantify the problem (2,3). Currently, antibiotic resistance presents an increasing trend that leads to significant public health issues and the increase in healthcare-associated infections caused by antibiotic-resistant pathogens worldwide (4,5). Resistance to different antimicrobial drugs is attributed to the increased irregular employment of antibiotics that have resulted in the drug resistance of expression of virulence factors, promotion of intra-hospital cross infection and even increased challenges of clinical treatments (6-8). A previous report suggests that the major driving force for the occurrence of antibiotic-resistant pathogens is the evolution of metabolic function caused by the rapid antibiotic consumption worldwide (9). Therefore, on the one hand, health organizations are required to implement appropriate policies to supervise antibiotic usage to reduce antibiotic resistance. On the other hand, understanding the molecular biological mechanisms underlying antimicrobial resistance is imminent to evaluate the effects of intervention strategies. Currently, antimicrobial resistance of gram-negative bacilli is a persistent issue (10). Antibiotic treatment is the most common therapeutic regiment for pulmonary infections with Klebsiella pneumoniae in patients with pneumonia (11). The current antimicrobial resistance and susceptibility of Klebsiella pneumoniae bacteria have been observed in clinical practice (12). Previous research has shown that the frequent outbreak of nosocomial infections is due to extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) produced by Klebsiella pneumoniae that is attributed to multiple mechanisms underlying drug resistance (13). In addition, strains of Klebsiella pneumoniae exhibit transferable multiple drug resistance based on clinical sepsis observation (14). Furthermore, antibacterial drug susceptibility of Klebsiella pneumoniae has attracted attention since pathogenic bacteria have acquired simultaneous resistance to various antimicrobial classes mediated by the production of ESBL. However, no precise molecular biological mechanisms underlying the antimicrobial drug resistance of Klebsiella pneumoniae have been reported (15). The correlation between antimicrobial drug resistance and biofilm formation along with ESBL lactamase produced in Escherichia coli has been demonstrated in a previous study (16). Recently, the increase in drug resistance among Klebsiella pneumoniae has caused a great problem in the treatment of pneumonia (17). The mechanisms involved when β-lactamase hydrolyzes β-lactam antibiotics have been investigated by performing different experiments (18). Previous research indicates that ancient evolutionary relationships between β-lactamases and antibiotic-producing bacteria are relatively conservative (19). In any way, antibiotic-resistance genes originate in antibiotic-producing microorganisms and subsequently integrate into the genome of other pathogens through transduction and/or transformation (20,21). Research has found that penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), membrane-associated macromolecules, play key roles in the cell wall synthesis process (22). In addition, zinc finger nuclease is a new approach to overcome β-lactam antibiotic resistance (23). In the present study, it was hypothesized that interfering with ESBL synthesis could decrease antimicrobial drug resistance leading to the control of nosocomial infections, transmission and cross infection. The study also investigated the association between the molecular biological mechanism underlying the antibiotic resistance of Klebsiella pneumoniae and the ESBL/PBP signaling pathway. The present study was designed to elucidate β-lactam resistance and to understand the efficacy of PBPs and zinc finger nuclease in increasing ESBL expression.