Introduction Circadian rhythms are responsible for temporal regulation of numerous physiological phenomena in the human body. At a molecular level, circadian rhythms are defined as a function of clock gene expression levels over a 24-hour period1. Clock gene expression levels throughout the day set up the pace of sleep-wake cycles, hunger, hormone production, body temperature, as well as other physiological functions2. In mammals, biological rhythms are driven by a central pacemaker located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus. It consists of approximately 20 000 neurons that exhibit independent rhythms of firing rate and gene expression3. The core clock system of the SCN works as a self-sustained transcriptional/translational feedback loop, involving a set of four integral proteins that act as activators or repressors within the system4. In addition, there is a group of kinases and phosphatases that regulate their localization and stability5. Apart from the core clock system in the SCN, circadian clocks and clock-controlled output genes (CCGs) are also present in peripheral tissues such as the liver, heart, kidney, pancreas, adipose tissue and skeletal muscle6–12. In this sense, the main synchronizer of the internal clock is solar light13, but it is known now that other non-photic stimuli such as feeding, social contact or physical exercise do also modulate the transcriptional activity of clock genes14–17. Likewise, internal clocks also play important roles on human behavior, accounting for variations in resting levels of neuromuscular, sensory-motor and cognitive performance throughout the day18–21. Recently, high-throughput transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses in mice have demonstrated that the time of day is a crucial factor to amplify the effect of exercise on systemic energy homeostasis and metabolic pathways within skeletal muscle22. In addition, exercise capacity exhibit diurnal fluctuations in mice and humans between the early and late part of their active phase23, which suggests that the time of day is a major modifier of exercise capacity. Time-of-day dependent fluctuations in exercise performance have been documented across different sports and seem to affect both endurance and resistance modes of exercise24–30. Whereas differences in endurance exercise performance might be as large as 26%25, strength performance may vary as much as 41% throughout the day30. Short-duration maximal exercises (i.e. less than 1 min - e.g. all-out sprints, maximal jumps or isometric contractions) comprise both modes of exercise and are characterized by higher locomotor requirements31 and anaerobic energy contributions32 than longer exercises. Thus, they represent a robust model to explore time-of-day effects on the musculoskeletal system. Previous studies have shown that performance in short-duration maximal exercises exhibits time-of-day dependent fluctuations with amplitudes up to 29.4% between the morning and evening hours24,33–45. Considering the large variation in short-duration maximal exercise performance throughout the day, it is clear that the time of day at which our athletes train or compete is not trivial. However, the literature available to date lacks a specific review on this subject. Therefore, the present review aims to (1) elucidate time-of-day specific effects on short-duration maximal exercise performance and (2) discuss strategies to promote better performance in short-duration maximal exercises at different times of the day.