INTRODUCTION The dynamic changes in microbiome composition are governed by multiple antagonistic or mutualistic microbial interactions (1). Several microbiome members achieve fitness benefits in competition with other bacteria through the production of bacteriocins or related antimicrobials (2, 3). The biosynthetic genes for the production of antimicrobials are located in highly variable and often mobile clusters, which usually also include genes conferring self-resistance to the producer strain (4, 5). Such mechanisms can confer resistance to a more or less narrow range of antimicrobials, thus defining the capacity of antimicrobial-producing bacterial strains to tolerate their own compound plus, potentially, those from competitors. The capacity to produce bacteriocins and related molecules has been found to be particularly abundant in microbiome members from nutrient-poor habitats such as the human nose (6). We are only beginning to understand the diversity and relevance of such molecules (7). We have recently reported that most isolates of Staphylococcus lugdunensis, a colonizer of the human skin and nasal mucosa, produce lugdunin, the founding member of a new class of circular antimicrobial peptides named fibupeptides (8, 9). Lugdunin is synthesized by nonribosomal peptide synthetases and inhibits target bacteria by dissipating their membrane potential, probably in a protonophore-like fashion (9). In addition to its direct antimicrobial activity, lugdunin stimulates human skin cells to produce antibacterial host defense peptides that synergize with lugdunin in the elimination of susceptible microbes (10). Lugdunin-producing S. lugdunensis can eradicate the major human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus, and nasal carriage of S. lugdunensis strongly reduces the rate of nasal colonization by S. aureus (8). The suitability of lugdunin as a potential new drug for S. aureus decolonization and therapy depends also on the risk of resistance development. We found that S. aureus cannot develop spontaneous resistance to lugdunin even after several passages in cultures with increasing subinhibitory concentrations of lugdunin (8). It has remained unclear, though, how S. lugdunensis achieves self-resistance to its product and if potential resistance genes could be mobilized and transferred to S. aureus or other pathogens. Here, we analyzed the lugEFGH genes encoded next to the lugdunin biosynthesis genes and show that the four ABC transporter-encoding genes are necessary and sufficient to confer lugdunin resistance. LugEFGH and the accessory small putative membrane protein LugI were required for both optimal secretion of endogenous lugdunin and resistance to exogenous lugdunin, and even slight changes in lugdunin structure abrogated the capacity of the ABC exporters to protect against these compounds.