1. Introduction Natural products (NPs) originating from plants, animals, marine organisms, and particularly from microbial sources continue to inspire novel discoveries in chemistry [1], biology [2], and medicine [3]. They possess immense structural and chemical diversity with a wide variety of biological properties. Most pharmacologically relevant antimicrobial, antiviral, anti-inflammatory and analgesic, and antitumor agents and approved small molecule drugs have either been NPs, their derivatives, synthetic compounds with NP pharmacophore, or their synthetic mimics. Notably, more than half of the new small molecule drugs have been developed from microbial NPs over the past decades [4,5]. Current interest in the discovery of NPs, especially from microbial sources, is mostly due to the failure of synthetic libraries to generate the expected number of developmental drug candidates in the pharmaceutical industry during the past 20–30 years. Additionally, the emergence of clinically relevant pathogens becoming increasingly resistant to currently used anti-infectives, i.e., antibiotics, warrants the search for novel bioactive metabolites in the field of microbial NPs [5,6,7,8,9]. However, finding novel NPs has become more difficult as the rediscovery of known NPs is still an increasing challenge. A high rate of the discovery of NPs was yielded by classical methods that recover only a fraction or even none of the desired secondary metabolites. The sharp decline in discoveries arose with limitations of the traditional top-down screening approaches. Those approaches, including bioassay- and chemical signature-guided isolations, have largely been exhausted and may no longer be capable of delivering novel lead compounds [10]. In the search for alternative methods, advancements made in bioinformatics and chemical analysis might hold the key to lead a renaissance in the field of microbial NP discovery. The growing knowledge of different biosynthetic machinery, drug targets, and resistance mechanisms has served as a launch platform to a new era in the methodological approach for drug discovery [11,12]. Given the rising limitations imposed by uncultivable strains and silent gene clusters, the integrative approach of bottom-up targeted screening, employing advanced analytical methods and guided by bioinformatics analysis, provides a promising alternative for unlocking the microbial metabolomes on an unprecedented scale. This approach eventually leads to disclosing the potential of microbial NP discovery [13,14,15]. This mini-review highlights in particular some of the most recent advances in microbial NP discoveries as well as their discovery examples in the last five years achieved by the use of genomic and metabolomic approaches. In terms of this, a genomic strategy uncovers the large number of microbial clustered genes (biosynthetic gene clusters) that encode the proteins responsible for the biosynthesis of a new NP that is undetected under standard fermentation conditions, while a metabolomics method embraces the global measurement of small-molecule metabolites from a microbe.