1. Introduction Due to the increase in global greenhouse gases and ozone layer depletion over the last few years, extreme weather conditions such as continuous seasonal drought have brought severe challenges for the cultivation and management of crops worldwide. Drought stress reduces plant growth, water content, cell membrane stability, and also severely affects various physiological metabolisms, such as polyamine (PA) metabolism [1,2], γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) metabolism [3], nitrogen (N) metabolism [4], and proline (Pro) metabolism in plants [5]. Metabolic disturbance and imbalance result in the inhibition of photosynthesis and respiration processes, leading towards reduced growth and development of plants. However, plants have developed a certain degree of self-resistance to adapt the changing environmental conditions at phenotypic, physiological, metabolic, and molecular levels [6]. PAs are low-molecular-weight aliphatic nitrogenous bases with strong biological activity. In plants, putrescine (Put), spermidine (Spd), and spermine (Spm) are three main PAs involved in response to unfavorable environmental conditions. In the past 50 years, PAs have generally been considered as a new class of plant growth regulator (PGR) because of their multiple biochemical and physiological functions related to plant growth, development, and adaptability to stress [7,8,9]. Plants can regulate the accumulation of Put, Spd, and Spm to enhance the tolerance to salt, drought, and cold stress [10,11]. It has been found that PAs content in cold-tolerant cucumber (Cucumis sativus) cultivar increased greatly, while cold-sensitive cultivar remained unchanged under low temperature stress [12]. For effects of PAs on drought tolerance in plants, foliar application of Spm could significantly improve the drought tolerance of rice (Oryza sativa) seedlings associated with alterations of leaf water status, photosynthesis, and membrane properties [13]. Exogenous Spm treatment significantly decreased drought-induced damage through enhancing antioxidant defense, carbohydrate metabolism, and dehydrins accumulation in white clover (Trifolium repens) [14,15]. Delayed chlorophyll (Chl) degradation regulated by the Spd was associated with changes in enzyme activities of Chl biosynthesis and catabolism in cucumber leaves under high temperature stress [16]. In addition, Arabidopsis mutant plants (acl5/spms) that could not synthesize Spm were more sensitive to drought stress. In addition, the Spm pretreatment could reverse the drought-sensitive phenotype of Arabidopsis acl5/Spms mutant that was unable to produce the Spm [17]. These results indicated that Spm regulated the tolerance against drought stress in plants by inducing a variety of changes in stress pathways. Manipulation of PAs biosynthesis and metabolism could be an effective way to improve stress tolerance in plants. It has been found that salt stress improved enzyme activities of arginine decarboxylases (ADC) and ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) involved in PAs biosynthesis in salt-tolerant rice cultivar, but had no significant effect in salt-sensitive cultivar [18]. Exogenous GABA or chitosan (CTS) improved drought tolerance of white clover associated with enhancement of PAs synthesis and decline in PAs catabolism [15,19]. PAs also affected other metabolic pathways when plants responded to abiotic stress. For example, exogenous PAs treatment can enhance the accumulation of Pro in bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon) under salt and drought conditions [20] and also induced the expression of pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase 1 (P5CS1) which is a key gene involved in Pro synthesis in sour orange (Citrus aurantium) plants under oxidative and nitrosative conditions [21]. Exogenous Spd played an important role in activating nitrate reductase (NR) activity, thereby mitigating the inhibition of NR activity in wheat (Triticum aestivum) under drought stress [22]. Exogenous Spd decreased the toxic effects of ammonium nitrogen (NH4+) in cucumber seedlings via increases in the activities of glutamine synthetase (GS), glutamate synthase (GOGAT), and glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) under Ca(NO3)2 stress [23]. In addition, diamine oxidase (DAO) performs a key role in the conversion of Put to GABA, and the application of aminoguanidine (AG), a DAO inhibitor, effectively inhibited the accumulation of GABA in the roots of German limonium (Limonium tataricum) [24]. Salt stress stimulated the DAO activity to improve accumulation of GABA in soybean (Glycine max) roots [25]. Under hypoxia condition, the DAO activity and PAs content increased significantly, which provided sufficient substrate for the formation of GABA in germinated faba bean (Vicia faba) [26]. However, it is still unclear how PAs metabolism interact with GABA, Pro and N metabolism to affect drought tolerance in plants. Drought stress not only limits cultivation and utilization of horticultural crops, but also increases maintenance and management cost. Creeping bentgrass (Agrostis stolonifera) is one of the most important cool-season perennial species of the Poaceae family grown worldwide as a turf or lawn in public parks due to its fine texture and strong regeneration ability after pruning. Creeping bentgrass is also used widely in sports turf such as golf course, bowling green, and lawn tennis because it can form high-quality turf [27]. Previous studies have shown that creeping bentgrass is vulnerable to a variety of abiotic stresses during growth and development, including high temperature [28], saline alkali stress [29], and drought [30]. The objectives of this study were to elucidate whether the Spm improved drought tolerance of creeping bentgrass through regulating PAs metabolism and to further explore potential effects of PAs metabolism on Pro metabolism, N absorption and assimilation, and GABA metabolism under drought stress. Current findings will provide a comprehensive understanding of PAs interacting with other metabolic pathways to regulate drought tolerance in plants.