1. Introduction Antibiotics are a class of molecules used for the treatment and prevention of bacterial infections. It is worth nothing that, before their introduction in clinical practice, there was no effective therapy for the treatment of different medical cases, such as pneumonia, typhoid fever, or gonorrhea [1]. The first natural antibiotic isolated was penicillin, in 1928, by Fleming and co-workers. The scientists, returning from holiday, found one of their Petri-dish containing colonies of Staphylococcus contaminated with a mold, later identified as Penicillium notatum. Fleming was surprised by the fact that no bacteria were able to growth around the mold; he was, at the same time, perceptive enough to consider the event remarkable. Despite Fleming’s initial observation, he dealt with chemical issues, such as stability and purification of the bioactive compound. After many years, in 1940, he finally left the idea to isolate the antibiotic substance produced by the mold. Luckily, an Oxford team, guided by Howard Florey and Ernest Chain, managed to purify penicillin in quantities useful for clinical testing. Many firms, such as Lederle, Merck, Pfizer, Squibb, and Abbott Laboratories contributed to solve the concerns related to the scale-up of submerged fermentation. Finally, in 1945, pharmaceutical companies started distributing and trading penicillin [2]. From that moment, pharmaceutical companies and universities began studies in this field, and identified several new bioactive molecules. The antibiotics era started, and its “gold period” was between the 1950s and 1970s, an epoch in which the most known important classes of antibiotics were discovered [1]. These bioactive compounds are produced naturally from different species of fungi and bacteria, but the most attractive class of microorganisms that are able to produce these secondary metabolites are Actinobacteria, in particular, Actinomycetes. The importance of this order is due to their abilities to produce different classes of antibiotics in terms of chemical structure and mechanisms of action. Current research suggests that Actinomycetes are also a prime resource in the finding of new natural products, thanks to their unique enzymatic sets that permit generating compounds that are potentially useful for diverse purposes. Moreover, different genera and species of Actinomycetes are able to produce the same class of antibiotics and, in few cases, the same chemical compound, indicating that the metabolic paths are strictly conserved among the order [3]. Thanks to antibiotics and the research developed in this field, many infections are now treatable, and life-quality/life expectancy are better than the past. Nature’s beauty is also found in the complexity of evolution, the engine that moves life in order to adapt itself to environmental changes. The fundamental unit of evolution is the mutation, or rather, the change, in the genetic material and the process through which the variation happens. Through mutations, bacteria become antibiotic-resistant and the infections they cause are harder to eradicate. According to WHO, at least 700,000 people die each year due to drug-resistant diseases, including 230,000 people who die from multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. Several diseases associated with the urinary and respiratory tracts, or sexually transmitted infections, are becoming untreatable. Lower respiratory infections remained the deadliest communicable disease, causing 3.0 million deaths worldwide, especially in low-income countries. Different causes have contributed to antibiotic-resistance crisis, including factors related to their overuse, inappropriate prescribing, and extensive use in agriculture and breeding [4,5,6]. The WHO and other organizations, such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), have developed different programs for reducing this phenomenon, with the goal of potentiating the diagnosis and optimizing therapeutic regimens, in addition to adopting a prevention policy, and control tracking and prescribing practices [7]. Recently, scientists shed new light on another interesting topic: the “abuse” of antibiotics in clinics. So far, it seems that abuse of these drugs could cause resistance in commensal bacteria flora. These bacteria are regarded as potential threats. Indeed, if spread out in the environment, they could become vectors for antibiotic resistance in pathogens or could create pathologies in immunocompromised people [8]. In this context, the great diversity of the metabolites with antibiotic activity produced by the Actinomyces is an important tool to tackle the antibiotic-resistance crisis. This review guides the reader through the different antibiotics produced by microorganisms belonging to the Actinomycetes order. These natural products will be described in detail, taking into consideration their peculiarities, in terms of both bioactivity and chemical structures. Further topics that will be examined concern their industrial preparations. In particular, the variability and the complexity of their chemical structures have challenged organic chemists, inspiring researches who are “finalized” to the synthesis of these natural products or to the creation of other useful bioactive compounds.