Introduction Plant pathogenic microorganisms are responsible for major crop losses worldwide and represent a substantial threat to food security. Potato scab is one of the main diseases affecting potato quality (Larkin et al., 2011) and presents a significant economic burden to farmers around the world. The Gram-positive bacterium Streptomyces scabies, which is the causal organism of potato scab, is ubiquitous and presents a threat in almost all soils (Bignell et al., 2010; Lerat et al., 2009). Properly managed irrigation is a reasonably effective control measure for potato scab. However, scab outbreaks still regularly occur in irrigated soil, and with increasing pressures on water use it is clear that alternative approaches to the control of scab are needed. An attractive potential alternative involves the exploitation of soil microorganisms that suppress or kill plant pathogens, known as biocontrol agents (Köhl et al., 2019; Weller, 2007). Many soil-dwelling Pseudomonas species form beneficial relationships with plants, positively affecting nutrition and health (Cheng et al., 2017; Loper et al., 2012; Zamioudis et al., 2013) and exhibiting potent antagonistic behavior towards pathogenic microorganisms (Biessy et al., 2019; Haas and Défago, 2005; Weller, 2007). Pseudomonas influence the plant environment using a diverse range of secondary metabolites (Arseneault et al., 2013; Gross and Loper, 2009; Nguyen et al., 2016; Stringlis et al., 2018) and secreted proteins (Ghequire and De Mot, 2014; Rangel et al., 2016). As such, Pseudomonas sp. have been identified as key biocontrol organisms in numerous plant-microbe systems (Mauchline et al., 2015; Wei et al., 2019), and these bacteria have potential applications as agricultural biocontrol agents and biofertilizers (Kwak and Weller, 2013; Weller, 2007). Many soil pseudomonads belong to the Pseudomonas fluorescens group, which consists of over 50 subspecies and exhibits huge phenotypic and genetic diversity (Biessy et al., 2019; Gomila et al., 2015; Loper et al., 2012; Melnyk et al., 2019; Silby et al., 2009), with a core genome of about 1300 genes and a pan-genome of over 30,000 genes (Garrido-Sanz et al., 2016). These bacteria use a variety of mechanisms to colonize the plant rhizosphere (Little et al., 2019), communicate with plants (Zamioudis et al., 2013), and suppress a range of plant pathogens (Haas and Défago, 2005), including bacteria (Arseneault et al., 2015), fungi (Michelsen et al., 2015), and insects (Flury et al., 2017), although a single strain is unlikely to have all of these attributes. Specialized metabolites are critical to many of these ecological functions, and the Pseudomonas specialized metabolome is one of the richest and best characterized of any bacterial genus (Gross and Loper, 2009; Nguyen et al., 2016; Stringlis et al., 2018). Various studies have associated pseudomonads with potato scab suppression. A significant increase in the abundance of Pseudomonas taxa has been observed for irrigated fields, correlating with reduced levels of potato scab (Elphinstone et al., 2009). Naturally scab-suppressive soils have also been shown to contain a greater proportion of Pseudomonas when compared to scab-conducive soils (Meng et al., 2012; Rosenzweig et al., 2012), and phenazine production by P. fluorescens can contribute to scab control (Arseneault et al., 2015; Arseneault et al., 2013; Arseneault et al., 2016). Differences between soil microbial populations that enable effective pathogen suppression are routinely assessed using amplicon sequencing (Fierer, 2017; Rosenzweig et al., 2012). However, the heterogeneity of the P. fluorescens group limits the usefulness of these methods for observing changes at the species or even the genus level. To effectively determine the relationship between the soil Pseudomonas population and disease suppression, it is important to accurately survey genotypic and phenotypic variability at the level of individual isolates, and to determine how this variation is linked to agriculturally relevant environmental changes (Mauchline and Malone, 2017). To investigate the genetic bases for S. scabies inhibition by P. fluorescens and to assess whether the scab-suppressive effects of irrigation derive from increased populations of biocontrol genotypes in the soil or on the plant, we focused on the Pseudomonas population from a potato field susceptible to potato scab. We first employed a phenotype-genotype correlation analysis across P. fluorescens strains isolated from a single potato field. We hypothesized that an unbiased correlation analysis would identify genetic loci and biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) that may be overlooked by screening for bioactive small molecules or by focusing on the biosynthetic repertoire of a limited number of strains. Here, we correlated phylogeny, phenotypes, specialized metabolism, and accessory genome loci, then investigated the importance of strong correlations by genetic manipulation of selected wild isolates. In total, 432 Pseudomonas strains were phenotyped (with 69 whole genomes sequenced). This approach also enabled us to answer a number of ancillary questions: how diverse is the P. fluorescens population from a single field location? Do the phenotypes associated with a P. fluorescens strain correlate with its biosynthetic capacity? What does irrigation do to both the population structure of the P. fluorescens group and to the wider bacterial community? Using this approach, we identify the P. fluorescens genes, gene clusters, and natural products that are required for potato pathogen suppression in vitro. We use this data to inform the discovery that the cyclic lipopeptide (CLP) tensin is a key determinant of in planta pathogen suppression by a Pseudomonas species. We show that irrigation induces profound and repeatable changes in the microbiome, both on a global level and within the P. fluorescens species group. Finally, we propose a model for the relationship between irrigation, pathogen suppression, and population-level shifts within the plant-associated P. fluorescens population.