1. Introduction Aspergillus section Circumdati encompasses 27 species, many of which are economically, biotechnologically, and medically important, and having vast impacts on human and animal health [1]. Circumdati species are notorious for producing highly toxic fungal compounds (e.g., ochratoxin A (OTA)) [2]. In contrast, some Circumdati species, such as A. ochraceus and A. slerotiorum, are used for the biotransformation of steroids and alkaloids, while A. melleus is an important source of proteolytic enzymes [3]. The yellow aspergilli A. affinis was the first species of the section Circumdati isolated from a freshwater environment (submerged decomposing leaf litter), and is able to produce OTA [4], posing a potential danger for marine organisms and for their consumers. However, little is known about A. affinis‘s ecological role or biotechnological potential. Marine compounds from fungi represent the largest category of marine natural products (MNPs) [5] and are the most widely reported to exhibit a diverse source and remarkable relevant bioactivities, including antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, anticancer, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and cytotoxic activities [6,7,8,9,10,11]. Recently, during a survey of marine fungi from the Portuguese coast, Gonçalves et al. [12] isolated a strain of A. affinis from sea water (strain CMG 70). Aspergillus affinis CMG 70 produces amylases, cellulases, chitinases, proteinases and xylanases, and has antimicrobial, cytotoxic and antioxidant activities [13]. The bioactivity profile of A. affinis CMG 70 suggests that it has the potential to represent a useful source of novel secondary metabolites. In fact, more than 30% of metabolites isolated from fungi so far are from Aspergillus or Penicillium [14]. Advances in high-throughput genome sequencing, metabolomic technologies, and bioinformatics have further enabled research on fungal biology, revealing an untapped source of (novel) biosynthetic gene clusters and compounds with a wide range of biotechnological applications [6,15,16,17]. At present, there is only one BioProject (PRJNA421325) on the whole-genome of A. affinis strain ATCC MYA-4773T (=CBS 129190). Sixteen genomes of other species belonging to the section Circumdati are available at the JGI Genome Portal database. To disclose the biotechnological potential of A. affinis, we sequenced and analyzed the genome of A. affinis CMG 70. Additionally, to assess the effect of sea salt on the metabolic output of A. affinis CMG 70, a metabolomic approach was used. Moreover, given the importance of the section Circumdati, a comparative analysis was undertaken using 16 fungal genomes of this section.