INTRODUCTION Streptomyces scabies (syn. S. scabiei) is a plant-pathogenic bacterium causing common scab disease, resulting in substantial damage to potatoes and other root and tuber crops, including carrot, radish, beet, parsnip, and turnip. Common scab disease is widely distributed and seriously diminishes the market value of the crops (1). The disease is characterized by deep-pitted and corky lesions on the root or tuber surface (2). Other Streptomyces species, S. reticuliscabiei, S. cheloniumii, and S. ipomoeae, are responsible for netted scab, russet scab, and soil rot of sweet potato, respectively (3–5). In the last decades, several studies focused on elucidating the molecular mechanisms of virulence of S. scabies. The production of thaxtomin A has been shown to be a key pathogenicity determinant (6). The txtABCDEH gene cluster is responsible for the biosynthesis of this 4-nitroindol-3-yl-containing 2,5-dioxo-piperazine. These thaxtomin biosynthetic genes are highly conserved across plant-pathogenic streptomycetes and reside on a pathogenicity island that is mobilized in some species (7). Thaxtomin A primarily targets expanding host tissue by affecting cellulose synthase complex density, expression of cell wall genes, and cell wall composition (8, 9). The production of thaxtomin A is strictly controlled, involving several layers of regulation. Cellobiose, together with cellotriose, is recognized as the main specific elicitor of thaxtomin A biosynthesis in S. scabies (10). Once imported via the CebEFG-MsiK ABC transporter (11), these products of cellulose turnover directly target the pathway-specific transcriptional activator TxtR and the cellulose utilization regulator CebR, which together constitute a double-locking system on the txtABCDE gene cluster. Specific interaction between CebR and cellobiose triggers the release of the repressor from different binding sites within the thaxtomin biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC), including txtR. This results in the transcriptional activation of txtA and txtB, consequently inducing thaxtomin A production and pathogenicity (12, 13). In addition, several bld global regulators directing secondary metabolism or morphological differentiation are involved in the regulation of thaxtomin synthesis (14). It is believed that plant-pathogenic streptomycetes produce other important phytotoxins involved in pathogenicity. Using proteomics, we previously demonstrated that the levels of enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of other secondary metabolites like concanamycin A and coronafacoyl phytotoxins are also dependent on cellobiose levels, a finding later confirmed by measuring altered levels of these compounds in the presence of cellobiose and/or upon cebR deletion (15). Natsume et al. isolated concanamycins A and B from Japanese S. scabies isolates (16). Recently, they demonstrated root growth-inhibitory activity, necrosis-inducing activity, and a synergistic effect with thaxtomin A (17). Coronafacoyl phytotoxins contribute to the development of root disease symptoms and cause hypertrophy of potato tuber tissue (18). The causative agent of russet scab, S. cheloniumii, produces FD-891, which induces necrosis of potato tuber tissue (19). All these data indicate that multiple secondary metabolites are involved in scab disease. Moreover, thaxtomin A-deficient streptomycetes that are also able to cause scab disease have been isolated. Streptomyces sp. strain GK18 produces borrelidin, which is reported to cause severe deep, black holes on potato tuber slices (20, 21). Similarly, fridamycin E was isolated from an S. turgidiscabies strain from a netted scab lesion in Sweden. This phytotoxin was demonstrated to reduce or even inhibit the sprouting of in vitro microtubers (22). Driven by the discovery that under thaxtomin production-inducing conditions, i.e., the addition of cellobiose, multiple proteins potentially involved in secondary metabolism were increased in abundance, we further analyzed extracts from the extracellular medium of Streptomyces scabies RL-34 in order to obtain insight into the metabolites secreted by this organism when grown in the presence of cellobiose. We report here the discovery of two new compounds that were characterized to be variants of the lipopeptide rotihibins A and B, previously discovered by Fukuchi et al. in extracellular extracts of Streptomyces sp. strain 3C02, later designated an S. graminofaciens strain (23, 24). A culture filtrate containing rotihibins A and B inhibits the growth of lettuce seedlings, while purified rotihibin A causes shoot stunting in tobacco seedlings at low concentrations (25). Recently, it was demonstrated that rotihibin A acts as a TOR (target of rapamycin) kinase (TORK) pathway inhibitor (26). Therefore, we assessed the plant growth-inhibitory effect of the newly isolated compounds, designated rotihibins C and D, and found a severe effect on growth and photosystem II photochemistry efficiency in Lemna minor L. and Arabidopsis thaliana L. Heynh. Furthermore, we provide data that demonstrate that the biosynthetic machinery to produce rotihibins C and D is encoded by a gene cluster covering a 33-kb segment containing 14 open reading frames (ORFs) that is conserved in both pathogenic and nonpathogenic plant-associated Streptomyces species.