Introduction Natural products are an unparalleled source of bioactive compounds, many of which have found application in medicine or agriculture or are important drivers of organismal interactions1,2. Traditionally, these compounds were isolated from microbes and plants by bioactivity-guided approaches; however, conventional strategies now fail to cover the constant demand for new chemical entities3. Advances in genomics, bioinformatics, and chemical analytics have paved the way for modern genomics-based discovery approaches. While natural products are chemically extremely diverse, their biosynthetic machineries are often highly conserved. Core biosynthetic enzymes are characterized by high amino-acid-sequence similarity, which allows screening of genomic data for the presence of specific biosynthetic genes that encode the required enzymatic activity. Eminent examples of genetically programmed molecular assembly lines include the major classes of natural products such as polyketides4 and nonribosomally synthesized peptides (NRPs)5, ribosomally synthesized and posttranslationally modified peptides (RiPPs)6, alkaloids7, and terpenes8. Analyses of genome sequences indicate that the biosynthetic potential of bacteria, fungi, and even higher organisms is much larger than what is observed under laboratory conditions. This may either be due to a strong downregulation of the biosynthetic genes or due to low production yields, which prevent detection of the compounds by analytical approaches9. To provide access to these compounds, specific triggers or stimuli are required to activate silent or downregulated gene clusters and to increase the compound production rates10. Today, vast genomic data are available and much progress has been made in data mining, compound monitoring, single-cell techniques, and genetic approaches for pathway activation, providing ideal conditions to access the cryptic metabolome. This review highlights recent advances (since 2015) in the genomics-guided discovery of secondary metabolites focusing on unconventional natural product sources and ecology-inspired discovery approaches.