1. Introduction Tomato Fusarium wilt, caused by Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici (Fol), is one of the most destructive diseases, causing a considerable loss in the production of both field and greenhouse tomatoes worldwide [1]. Since Fusarium wilt is a difficult disease to control [2,3,4], control strategies including physical and cultural methods, chemical fungicides treatment, and the cultivation of resistance tomato cultivars [5] achieved limited efficacy [6]. In addition, excessive usage of agrochemicals imposed serious negative impacts on the environment, causing the pollution of soil and groundwater reservoirs, an accumulation of chemical residues in the food chain, an emergence of pesticide-resistance pathogens, and health hazards [7]. As a result, biocontrol microbes have been suggested as a promising alternative to agrochemicals in plant disease control. Numerous biocontrol microbes, especially Bacillus strains, have been commercially developed as biopesticides and biofertilizers worldwide [7]. Biocontrol microbes protect the crops from an invasion of phytopathogens via (1) direct modes of action, e.g., the antibiosis and production of antimicrobial secondary metabolites [8,9]; and (2), the indirect modes of action, including induced systemic resistance (ISR) and the competition for nutrients and space [10,11]. The investigation of biocontrol microbes through conventional genetic and biochemical approaches could not unveil the full potential of these microbes due to the absence of appropriate natural triggers or stress signals under laboratory conditions [12]. With the development of high-throughput DNA sequencing technologies and genome mining, along with MS-based analytical methods (e.g., GC/LC-MS, LC-ESI-MS, and MALDI-TOF-MS), more potential biocontrol microbes can be revealed. For instance, the Bacillus amyloliquefaciens FZB42 genome contains nine giant gene clusters synthesizing secondary metabolites which are involved in the suppression of soil-born plant pathogens. Several gene/gene clusters are implicated in swarming motility, plant colonization, biofilm formation, and the synthesis of plant growth-promoting volatile compounds and hormones [13]. A wide range of extracellular proteins and phytase in the FZB42 secretome were detected through two-dimensional electrophoresis, MALDI-TOF-MS, and the proteomics approach, indicating this strain can grow on the plant’s surface and supply phosphorus for the plant under phosphorus starvation. Additionally, four members of the macrolactin family were identified in an FZB42 culture filtrate by combining mass spectrometric and ultraviolet-visible data which perfectly agree with the overall structure of the macrolactin gene cluster found in the FZB42 genome [13]. Recently, the genome analysis of plant-protecting bacterium B. velezensis 9D-6 demonstrated that this strain can synthesize 13 secondary metabolites, of which surfacin B and surfactin C were detected as antimicrobial compounds against Clavibacter michiganensis through LC-MS/MS [14]. Furthermore, the genome mining of B. inaquosorum strain HU Biol-II revealed that this bacterial genome contains eight bioactive metabolite clusters and the production of seven metabolites was confirmed through HPLC MS/MS [15]. In our previous study, the B. inaquosorum strain KR2-7 was isolated from the rhizosphere soil of the tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) and was introduced as a highly effective biocontrol agent against Fol with a biocontrol efficiency of 80% under greenhouse conditions [16]. To better understand the biocontrol mechanisms of strain KR2-7 against Fol, whole-genome sequencing was conducted to identify putative gene clusters for secondary metabolites biosynthesis and to characterize gene/gene clusters involved in plant colonization, plant growth promotion, and induced systemic resistance (ISR). Moreover, secondary metabolites and other compounds related to identified BGCs and gene/gene clusters were detected using MALDI-TOF-MS analysis to confirm the results of genome mining.