Introduction Macrolides are broad-spectrum antibiotics that act by inhibiting the protein synthesis through interaction with the large ribosomal subunit [1, 2]. Since their discovery in the early fifties, macrolides have seen extensive clinical use, becoming one of the most frequently prescribed types of antibiotics with applications within both human and animal medicine [3, 4]. Macrolides are primarily effective against Gram-positive bacteria (e.g. 

Streptococcus pneumoniae

 or 

Mycoplasma genitalium

 [5]) since the molecular structure of the drugs in combination with the decreased permeability of the cell wall makes them less potent against Gram-negative bacteria. However, semi-synthetic macrolides, notably azithromycin, show greater activity towards Gram-negative bacteria, which has led to macrolides also being considered as a first-line treatment for many proteobacterial pathogens (e.g. 

Salmonella enterica

 or 

Shigella

 sp. [6]) or as an alternative treatment when penicillin and fluoroquinolones are not applicable due to resistance or patient allergy [2, 3]. Resistance to macrolides is typically associated with one of three mechanisms – modification of the target ribosomal RNA, efflux or enzymatic inactivation of the drug [6] – and is often caused by mobile resistance genes, which spread to and between pathogens through horizontal gene transfer (HGT) [7, 8]. Two of the most common types of macrolide resistance genes are erm genes, encoding 23S rRNA methyltransferases, and mph genes, encoding GTP-dependent macrolide 2′-phosphotransferases [9, 10]. Erm enzymes either mono- or di-methylate position N6 of A2058 in the 23S rRNA (

Escherichia coli

 nomenclature), which, through steric hindrance, prevents the macrolide from interacting with its binding site. In addition to both natural and semi-synthetic macrolides, this results in resistance to lincosamide and streptogramin B antibiotics [1]. The exact origins of Erm enzymes have not been determined, though they are hypothesized to have evolved from the KsgA family of highly conserved 16S rRNA methylases through mutations leading to a shift in the ribosomal target [11]. In contrast to Erm, Mph enzymes interact directly with the macrolide molecules by attaching a phosphate group to the 2′-OH group, which changes their biochemical structure such that they become unable to interact with the ribosomal target [12]. This means that, unlike Erm enzymes, Mph enzymes only protect against macrolides. Additionally, Mph enzymes do not have a universal substrate profile, meaning that not all variants protect equally well against all macrolides [13]. The origin of Mph enzymes is less clear, however, they are related to similar enzymes that phosphorylate aminoglycoside antibiotics, which in turn have been suggested to have an evolutionary relationship with eukaryotic protein kinases (e.g. cAMP-dependent protein kinase cAPK) based on structural similarity [14, 15]. While erm genes are the most abundant and diverse type of macrolide resistance genes, with 45 different genes described to date (<80% internal amino acid identity), mph genes are less numerous and with 15 genes described to date [16, 17]. Commensal and environmental bacteria are known to maintain a large and diverse collection of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) [18], including many yet uncharacterized ARGs that may be mobilized from their host and spread to other bacteria [19–21]. Indeed, new types of erm and mph genes are frequently being discovered in clinical settings, typically after they have been horizontally transferred to human pathogens [14, 22]. The presence of a large and diverse macrolide resistome has been further emphasized by recent studies that show that new erm and mph genes are ubiquitously present in many environments, including aquatic, terrestrial and the human microbiome [23–25]. It is, thus, likely that the macrolide resistance genes characterized to date only reflect a small part of the total diversity. Without better knowledge of the resistome, it will be almost impossible to predict what genes may be mobilized into pathogens in the future. In addition, none of the currently known erm and mph genes has a well-described evolutionary history, which makes their origin unclear. This hampers our ability to implement management strategies that delay, and preferably reduce, the transfer of new macrolide resistance genes into clinical settings. In this study, we performed a systematic investigation of the macrolide resistome to characterize its size and diversity. Optimized probabilistic gene models were used to screen large volumes of genomic and metagenomic sequence data, which resulted in 28 340 identified genes, organized into 663 macrolide resistance gene families (<70 % amino acid identity), 44 of which contained previously known genes. Among the new resistance gene families, we identified genes from six families on mobile genetic elements (MGEs) in pathogenic hosts. In total, ten novel potential macrolide resistance genes were selected for experimental validation, of which seven induced a resistance phenotype when expressed in 

E. coli

. Finally, we showed through phylogenetic analysis that the most clinically relevant erm genes were likely mobilized from a specific part of the Firmicutes taxonomic tree, while mobile mph genes are much more diverse with origins in multiple phyla. Our study significantly expands the known macrolide resistome, provides insights into its evolutionary history and identifies several new emerging genes that have already spread into human pathogens. The large collection of macrolide resistance genes predicted in this study will also facilitate early detection of new macrolide resistance determinants before they spread widely and become a global threat to public health.