INTRODUCTION From the skin to the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, microbes colonize nearly every surface of the human body. The composition of these microbial communities varies across geographic scales, which can be as minute as different surfaces of the same tooth (1). This biogeography is controlled by abiotic factors, such as oxygen levels, pH, and salivary flow in the oral cavity (2, 3), and by biotic factors, which include competitive microbial interactions (4). Members of the endogenous microbiota engage in competition among themselves as well as with pathogens and other invading microbes (5). Together, these competitive interactions directly affect the population dynamics and spatial patterning of the microbiota across the human body. Bacteria have evolved numerous systems to mediate competition, which include contact-dependent mechanisms, such as type VI secretion systems, and contact-independent mechanisms through the production of specialized metabolites (also called “secondary metabolites” and “natural products”) (6, 7). The complex competitive interactions that occur between microbes include exploitation or interference competition. In exploitation competition, one organism indirectly inhibits the growth of its competitors by preventing them from accessing resources, including nutrients and physical space. In interference competition, one organism produces toxic effectors that directly harm or inhibit its competitors. Microbes use specialized metabolites for both exploiting and interfering with the microbes they compete with for resources. For example, siderophores bind and sequester iron and other metals in exploitation, while antibiotics disrupt physiological processes in target cells as part of interference. It is important to note that these modes of competition are not mutually exclusive. Within the GI tracts of humans and other animals, colonization resistance against pathogens mediated by the endemic microbiota involves exploitation through niche occlusion (8) and interference, including type VI secretion systems (9) and production of metabolites (10). In bacteria and other microbes, the genes responsible for production of specialized metabolites are organized in genomic loci called biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs). These BGCs encode proteins necessary for biosynthesis, regulation, export, and self-resistance to specialized metabolites. Further, by characterizing the protein domains contained within synthetases and identifying the other biosynthetic enzymes encoded by a given BGC, one may classify the type of specialized metabolite it encodes (11). In some classes, in particular with nonribosomal peptide and type I polyketide BGCs, the core chemical structure encoded may be inferred by understanding the logic of assembly line enzymology (12). Bioinformatic approaches have been developed that enable the identification of putative BGCs from genomic and metagenomic sequences, leading to the identification of specialized metabolites in a genome-first manner. For example, the lactocillin BGC was first identified in metagenomic assemblies produced by the Human Microbiome Project before the antibiotic was purified from Lactobacillus gasseri cultures (13). The wexrubicin BGC was identified in GI tract metagenomes, amplified from Blautia wexlerae, and heterologously expressed to yield an anthracycline antibiotic (14). Further, by following the biosynthetic logic for nonribosomal peptides, total chemical synthesis was used to produce the antibiotic humimycins encoded by Rhodococcus species genomes (15). Together, these and other examples have led to a newfound appreciation of the biosynthetic potential of animal microbiomes for the identification of new bioactive natural products (16–20). Previous efforts to characterize the specialized metabolite biosynthetic potential of human microbiomes have focused primarily on the GI tract (21, 22). Though the GI tract contains most of the microbial biomass of the human body and possesses a diverse bacterial community (23, 24), it does not directly receive input from the external environment. Instead, for exogenous microbes to reach the GI tract, they must first pass through the aerodigestive tract (ADT) (25). The ADT is a continuous multiorgan system that comprises the upper respiratory and digestive tracts, including the nasal and oral cavities (26). In contrast to the GI tract, the ADT directly faces the external environment. Therefore, in addition to competing among themselves, members of the ADT microbiota compete with exogenous microbes from the external environment, including human pathogens, and act as a barrier against colonization of the lower digestive and respiratory tracts by invaders (27, 28). Though many ADT sites possess a microbiota less diverse than that of the GI tract (23, 29, 30), bacterial genera found in the ADT, including Corynebacterium, Staphylococcus, and Streptococcus species, are known producers of specialized metabolites. For instance, bacteria that colonize the nasal cavity have previously been reported to produce the specialized metabolites dehydroxynocardamine (31), lugdunin (32), and nukacin IVK45 (33). Similarly, there is extensive literature on bacteriocin-mediated competition between oral bacteria, particularly within the context of dental caries (34, 35). These examples demonstrate the potential of the ADT microbiota to produce specialized metabolites, but our understanding of the natural ecology of these metabolites remains limited. By surveying BGCs from the ADT microbiota, we will better understand the capability of these bacteria to produce specialized metabolites, determine which genera to target for natural product discovery efforts, and inform our understanding of mechanisms underlying the biogeography of the upper digestive and respiratory tracts. In the present study, we identified specialized metabolite BGCs in the genome sequences of bacteria that colonize the ADT and found extensive capacity for specialized metabolism among members of the ADT microbiota. By comparing these BGCs with experimentally characterized BGCs, we determined that most of the ADT BGCs are uncharacterized and the metabolites they encode are unknown. We then mapped metagenomic reads onto the ADT BGCs and used clustering analyses to identify distribution patterns of bacterial communities and specialized metabolism across the ADT. Using Shannon’s diversity index, we surveyed the alpha diversity of bacterial communities and BGCs across the ADT and determined that these diversity metrics are correlated. We then determined that the buccal mucosa, external naris, gingiva, and tongue dorsum are each enriched with specific families of BGCs, despite harboring many of the same bacterial genera. We found that the distribution of BGC families reflects potential ecological interactions that occur at and between the microbiota colonizing different ADT sites, suggestive of potential mechanisms that contribute to the biogeography of these sites. Finally, we performed targeted isolation of Actinomyces, a genus that has been underexplored for specialized metabolism, from the oral cavity and demonstrated their bioactivity against a panel of bacteria, including human pathogens. These data provide new insights into the potential for specialized metabolism among the ADT microbiota, inform our understanding of the ecology of this system, and highlight bacterial genera that have been underappreciated for natural product discovery.