Introduction Endophytes are special “microorganism” with much value. They can parasitize different parts of living plants but do not obviously cause symptoms of external infection in host plants or symbiosis and coevolution with their host (Chen et al., 2022). As an important cooperative “partner” of plant growth and development, endophytes greatly impact on host physiological metabolism, which helps or stimulates host plants against various stresses (Koskimäki et al., 2022). More importantly, during this long-term association, the endophytes and their host form an interactive relationship of coevolution and mutually beneficial symbiosis. The genetics and metabolism of endophytes ameliorate and supplement the material metabolic pathway and related gene expression of their hosts (Mei et al., 2019). Conversely, the host also creates a unique community structure and gene characteristics of endophytes (Oukala et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022). Exploring the application of endophytes has become a hot topic with the gradual understanding of the interaction between endophytes and hosts. Plants were first thought of as individual organisms that produced metabolites by themselves to completely support their growth and development. This cannot explain the phenomenon in which plants growing in the wild are “better,” such as in medicinal characters, than those under artificial cultivation; artificial cultivation of medicinal plants loses the original effect, etc. It was not until the discovery of endophytes that their interactive relationship was gradually revealed, especially after the application of omics technology at the cellular and molecular levels in which the study of the interactive relationship between the two progressed rapidly. In recent years, researchers have been trying to explore the evolutionary relationship between host and endophytes, and trace the reciprocity mechanism of this specific evolutionary relationship, in order to provide theoretical basis for the commercial development of endophytes. At present, some endophytic bacteria and their active products have been successfully used in commercial production and obtained great benefits in the preparation of new drugs and agricultural protection (Singh and Gaur, 2017; Mishra et al., 2018b; Sahu et al., 2021). It is of great economic value to reveal the interactive mechanisms between plants and endophytes to explore and release the potential for the industrial development of endophytes. To provide a reference for revealing the complex interaction between endophytes and their hosts, this review first discusses the interaction between endophytes and host plants and then the effects of endophytes and their secondary metabolites on plant growth and development. The application of endophyte resources instead of is also discussed.