1. Introduction According to the FAO/WHO, probiotics refer to “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host”. Due to their beneficial effects, probiotics are being increasingly applied nowadays to prevent and treat inflammatory bowel disease and irritable bowel syndrome, as well as other human diseases [1]. Although a great number of probiotic foods have emerged in recent years, their consumption remains challenging as they are quite susceptible to the harsh conditions under which they are processed and delivered to the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Presently, various microencapsulation techniques, namely extrusion, freeze drying, spray drying, emulsification, and electrospinning, can be applied to protect probiotics against harsh conditions [2,3,4], but compared to these methods, enhancing the self-resistance of probiotics during the production process represents a much simpler strategy, which has been drawing the attention of researchers [5]. Biofilms, often made up of polysaccharides, DNA, and proteins, are highly complex but organized collections of microorganisms that are often fixed onto a carrier surface [6]. Even though biofilms from some pathogenic bacteria can lead to undesirable effects, there are nevertheless many clear examples in which the high biomass density and resistance of biofilms have resulted in useful applications, such as for the production of chemicals, fermented foods, and anti-microbial compounds. For example, it was reported that biofilms from Lactiplantibacillus plantarum (L. plantarum), formed on a nanofiber mat, could be employed as a starter culture for producing yogurt that had higher viability during shelf life [7]. It was also found that L. rhamnosus GG, encapsulated in biofilms, displayed better stability at both high and low temperatures compared to a similarly-encapsulated planktonic strain [8]. Some studies have further reported significantly improved survivability of lactic acid bacteria [9] and L. plantarum LIP-1 strains [10] when they were present within biofilms during gastrointestinal digestion or in freeze-drying environments, compared to their planktonic state. Hence, producing probiotic biofilms through which their resistance to unfavorable environments can be improved could be a useful approach. Generally, a broad range of materials, including inorganic and organic compounds, can be used as a support for microbial adhesion. Compared to inorganic materials (i.e., stainless steel and ceramics), organic ones are likely to be more advantageous as their porosity can be tailored according to the needs of the target organism [11]. At present, electrospun fiber mats, widely used in the tissue engineering field, can be used to model a natural extracellular matrix so as to improve microbial adhesion and growth on the fibers. In this respect, electrospun fiber mats have, therefore, been considered as suitable materials for the producing biofilms [12]. Biofilm formation is a very complex process that is influenced by several variables, such as cultivation conditions (medium, pH, temperature, etc.), scaffold properties (surface roughness, hydrophilicity, charge, etc.), and types of strains (cell structure, gram-negative or gram-positive, age, species, etc.) [13]. Of these, the type of medium as well as the pH and temperature of the culture are some of the most important factors, as their effects are not only variable but may also differ between species [14]. In order to increase biofilm formation to improve the ability of probiotics to resist harsh conditions, L. plantarum GIM1.648 was selected as a model probiotic, and for the first time, its capacity to form biofilms on electrospun ethyl cellulose nanofiber mats was studied. In addition, the effects of environmental conditions (medium and culture conditions) on biofilm formation were investigated, along with the protective effects of the biofilms against gastrointestinal digestion and heat treatment. Eventually, real time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) assays were used to compare the expression of the luxS gene before and after biofilm formation in order to better understand the relationship between the gene expression and biofilm formation.