1. Introduction Photobacterium (Vibrionaceae, Gammaproteobacteria) comprises a group of Gram-negative, facultative-aerobic, mostly halophilic, and motile bacteria [1]. The genus currently consists of 37 validly published named species (www.bacterio.net (accessed on 19 May 2022)), with P. phosphoreum as the type species [2]. All species of Photobacterium were originally thought to be luminescent. However, later studies found that only strains of P. angustum, P. aquimaris, P. ganghwense, P. kishitanii, P. leiognathi, P. mandapamensis, and P. phosphoreum display this characteristic [1,3]. Although members of this genus are ubiquitous in marine contexts, isolations of Photobacterium strains from non-marine habitats such as a saline lake, the rhizosphere of a terrestrial weed, and spoiled meat have been reported [4,5,6,7]. Photobacterium exhibits different lifestyles: some occur as free-living in seawater and sediments; others function as symbionts of the light organs of marine fish and squid, decomposers of dead fish, or pathogens for marine animals [1,8,9]. High diversity within Photobacterium has been reported, which could be linked to the lifestyles of the species [10,11]. Photobacterium has been studied for ecophysiological traits such as piezophilic, salt adaptation, bioluminescence, and motility [3,12,13]. Photobacterium also encompasses species that synthesize various secondary metabolites, including those with antibiotic activity [14]. Wietz et al. reported that a pyrrothine antibiotic, holomycin, was produced by P. galatheae S2753 (formerly P. halotolerance) [15]. Holomycin shows a broad antibiotic spectrum on several pathogenic bacteria belonging to the genera Staphylococcus, Enterococcus, Escherichia, and some marine bacteria such as Roseobacter, Pseudoalteromonas, and Vibrio [15,16]. For instance, P. galatheae S2753 also showed antagonism against a bacterial fish pathogen, Vibrio anguillarum, and a human pathogen, Staphylococcus aureus [17]. The mode of action of holomycin is speculated to inhibit RNA polymerase synthesis of the target bacteria [16]. In addition to the production of holomycin, Photobacterium sp. strain S2753 was also capable of producing two novel cyclodepsipeptides, solonamide A and B, which can inhibit the expression of the virulence gene of S. aureus [16]. These findings revealed that some Photobacterium strains have potential as biocontrol agents against pathogenic bacteria. However, the antagonism potential of Photobacterium spp. for use in aquaculture is still not well studied. Increases in aquaculture production to meet global seafood demand have largely been accomplished through the intensification of current farming systems, resulting in a higher incidence of disease outbreaks. For instance, a shrimp disease, acute hepatopancreatic necrosis disease (AHPND), caused by Vibrio parahaemolyticus (VpAHPND), was reported in China in 2010 [18] and widely spread to South Asia from Latin America [19,20]. A detrimental reduction in shrimp production was caused by VpAHPND due to its high mortality rate, which is 100% on post-larvae of black tiger shrimp (Penaeus monodon) and Pacific white shrimp (P. vannamei), causing severe economic losses [18]. To control VpAHPND, several biocontrol strategies, such as probiotic supplementation, vaccination, and biofloc, have attracted attention in shrimp aquaculture [21,22,23]. However, these methods face several shortcomings, such as the requirement for long-term probiotic supplementation, the low efficacy of vaccination, and the difficulty of producing and maintaining biofloc in the aquaculture field. Therefore, alternative approaches for the control of VpAHPND have been demanded. A pan-genome is the set of all non-redundant genes present in a given dataset, including the core, which is defined as the homologous genes present in all genomes in the dataset [24]. The status of the core- and pan-genomes is dependent on the number of analysed genomes, the species’ ability to acquire exogenous DNA via horizontal gene transfer, and its ecological niche [25]. A Photobacterium sp. (designated CCB-ST2H9) isolated from sediment collected in a previous metagenomic investigation [26] is the subject of this research. The aim of this study was to sequence the genome of CCB-ST2H9 to provide a glimpse into the genetic basis of antagonism. Core- and pan-genome analysis was performed to provide insights into the genome plasticity within Photobacterium and functional versatility for colonization of different niches. New clustering based on biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) profiles separated the Photobacterium into BGCs-rich and BGCs-low groups. Our study yielded a comprehensive understanding of the diversity of the biosynthetic gene clusters in Photobacterium, which will facilitate the use of the bacteria for bioactive metabolites production and as biocontrol agents in aquaculture.