Introduction As herbicide resistance continues to rise, the efficacy of herbicides has diminished1 such that new modes of action are desperately needed. Only one new herbicide mode of action has been brought to market in almost 40 years2. Weeds are yet to evolve significant resistance to clomazone and bixlozone1, two herbicides that disrupt isoprenoid biosynthesis by targeting the enzyme 1-deoxy-d-xylulose-5-phosphate synthase3. Found in all kingdoms of life, isoprenoid biosynthesis is crucial for the synthesis of lipids, hormones, vitamins and defence compounds4–6. The biosynthetic route differs between kingdoms; most animals, fungi, protists and archaea use a mevalonate (MVA) pathway, whereas most Gram-negative bacteria including cyanobacteria use a methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway7. Through a shared evolutionary history with cyanobacteria, plants use both pathways7–11 compartmentalised to the cytosol (MVA) or plastids (MEP)12–14. None of the known modes of action for any of the commercial herbicides affect the MVA pathway1. An important enzyme in the MVA pathway is HMGR, which is a highly regulated15–19, the rate-limiting enzyme of the MVA pathway and is the target of the group of hypercholesterolaemia therapeutics known as statins20,21. Two classes (I and II) of HMGR have been defined22 based on the differences between the catalytic core domain structure23,24, the presence of an N-terminal membrane domain of between two (plants) and eight (human) membrane-spanning helices in the majority of class I enzymes20,25, and the varied NAD(P)H cofactor preference26. HMGR regulation appears to be conserved between humans and plants with the N-terminus regulated by ubiquitination whereas catalytic core activity is regulated by phosphorylation7. Many of the regulatory proteins differ, however, and this is further complicated by plants having multiple copies or isoforms plus a wide variety of external signals modifying expression, such as light and herbivory7,27. The first potent statin inhibitor of HMGR discovered was mevastatin, isolated from Penicillium citrinum in 197628. Lovastatin, isolated from Aspergillus terreus in 1978, became the first commercial statin in 198729. Second-generation statins have been semi-synthetic or synthetic products29, but all statins competitively inhibit HMGR via a HMG-like moiety and a variable hydrophobic group that together give affinities to HMGR that are 10,000-fold higher than HMG-CoA30. Lovastatin and mevastatin, as well as the semi-synthetic pravastatin and synthetic atorvastatin are all known to be herbicidal31–33. HMGR might have been overlooked as a herbicide target due to potential off-target risks arising from its conservation in humans and the antimicrobial activity of statins34, but recently developed selective insecticides against HMGR illustrate the potential to develop HMGR herbicides35. Here, we solve crystal structures for a plant HMGR in apo form and complexed with a statin. These structures reveal a wider active site conserved in plants compared to other organisms. By rational design we develop statin derivatives with over 20-fold specificity for the plant over the human enzyme and, which importantly, retain herbicidal activity. By comparing the AtHMG1 structure to fungal HMGR genes in biosynthetic clusters for natural statins, we demonstrate a single amino acid change confers statin tolerance in vitro and in planta. Together these findings suggest HMGR is a viable target for herbicide development.