INTRODUCTION Today, antimicrobial resistance (AMR) has become a well-known threat to human health with an estimated number of 700,000 people per year dying of drug-resistant infections (1). The dramatic rise of antimicrobial resistance over the past decade has even led to the moniker “silent pandemic” (2). Therefore, AMR is often directly associated with human impacted environments with a global increase in resistant bacteria linked to the over- and misuse of antibiotics (3). However, contrary to public perception, AMR is a natural phenomenon, which has existed for billions of years (4). Long before the rather recent use of antibiotics in the clinical setting, microorganisms have used these, along with corresponding protective mechanisms, to establish competitive advantages over other microbes contending for the same environment and/or resources (5). Microorganisms, in general, produce a range of secondary metabolites with diverse chemical structures, which in turn confer a variety of functions, including antibiotics (6). Such secondary metabolites, including metal transporters and quorum-sensing molecules (7, 8) are associated with enhanced fitness by driving growth, including by inhibiting the growth of other bacteria by depleting iron through increased capacity to compete for this essential resource. Consequently, many of these natural products have found their applications in industrial settings, but also as anti-infective drugs in human medicine (7, 9, 10). The biosynthetic pathways responsible for producing these specialized metabolites are encoded by locally clustered groups of genes known as “biosynthetic gene clusters” (BGCs). Typically, BGCs include genes for expression control, self-resistance, and metabolite export (11). They can, however, be further divided into various classes, including nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs), type I and type II polyketide synthases (PKSs), terpenes, and bacteriocins, alongside others (10). NRPSs and PKSs specifically have been of interest due to their known synthesis of putative antibiotics (12, 13). Furthermore, evidence suggests that within these BGCs at least one resistance gene conferring resistance can be found as a self-defense mechanism against the potentially harmful secondary metabolites encoded by the BGC (14). For instance, the tylosin-biosynthetic gene cluster of Streptomyces fradiae also encodes three resistance genes (tlrB, tlrC, and tlrD) (15), while in another report, Streptomyces toyacaensis, the vanHAX resistance cassette, is proximal to the vancomycin biosynthesis gene cluster, thereby encoding inherent resistance (16). Remote and pristine microbial communities provide a potentially rich genetic resource to explore naturally occurring antibiotic resistance from the preantibiotic era. These phenomena may currently only be evident in a few environments with limited anthropogenic influence (e.g., permafrost, glaciers, deep sea, and polar regions). These ARGs and resistant bacteria evolving in pristine environments may therefore be considered the inherent antibiotic resistance present in the environment (5). Despite this, some recent reports suggest that even these remote microbial communities may be coming under the influence of anthropogenic antimicrobial resistance (17), thus necessitating the need to characterize these relatively pristine environments before their imminent decline due to climate change. We have recently reported the genomic and metabolic adaptations of epilithic biofilms to environmental conditions in glacier-fed streams (GFSs) (18). For example, given the short flow season during glacial melt in summer, the incentive to reproduce quickly while conditions are favorable, is high. During these so-called windows of opportunity, the necessity for taxa to appropriate resources, especially when they are limiting as in GFSs, yields a competitive environment. Within these biofilms, we observed cross-domain interactions and internal recycling of nutrients between microorganisms to potentially mitigate the harsh nutrient and environmental conditions of the GFSs. Additionally, owing to complex biodiversity (19) and generally oligotrophic conditions (20) in GFSs, epilithic biofilms are ideal model systems for understanding BGCs and AMR in the context of cooccurring microorganisms. Our previous insights revealed that taxa such as Polaromonas, Acidobacteria, and Methylotenera have strong interactions with eukaryotes such as algae and fungi (21). The inherent diversity allows for understanding the influence of AMR in microbial interactions as evidenced by bacterial–fungal interactions leading to the discovery of penicillin by Alexander Fleming in 1928 (22). Along similar lines, Netzker et al. (23) reported that microbial interactions lead to the production of bioactive compounds, including antibiotics potentially shaping the microbial consortia within a community. Here, to shed light on the role of AMR in shaping microbial communities within pristine environments, we used whole-genome shotgun sequencing (metagenomics) to investigate twenty-one epilithic biofilms from glacier-fed streams. These samples were collected from 8 GFSs spread across the Southern Alps in New Zealand and the Caucasus in Russia (Table S1). Herein, we found 29 categories of ARGs within the GFSs across both bacterial and eukaryotic domains. Importantly, most of the AMR was found in bacteria. We also identified antibacterial BGCs that were encoded both in bacterial and eukaryotic metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs). Our findings demonstrate that microorganisms within biofilms from pristine environments not only encode ARGs, but that they may potentially influence several features of epilithic biofilms such as biofilm formation, community assembly, and/or maintenance, including conferring potential mechanisms for competitive advantages under extreme conditions.