INTRODUCTION According to the World Health Organization (WHO), multidrug resistance is one of the major threats to public health (1). While the number of infections caused by multidrug-resistant bacteria is constantly increasing, there has been a steady decline in the discovery and development of new druggable anti-infectives over the past years (2,3). Thus, there is an urgent need for novel antibiotic active substances. One of the major challenges in current antibiotic screening programs is the fast dereplication of already known compounds. Indeed, most antibiotics were discovered during the golden age of antibiotic discovery from the 1940s to the 1960s (4). Back then, mainly the classical screening approach was applied, which included the isolation of soil-derived microorganisms that were screened for antimicrobial activity, a procedure known as the Waksman platform. However, many years of repeated application of this screening procedure mainly led to the rediscovery of already known substances, making it necessary to develop and apply new strategies for drug discovery. One such new approach, which we also refer to in the current manuscript, is represented by the mode of action (MoA)-based Bacillus subtilis bioreporter panel, recently reported by Wex et al. (5), which allows for fast and efficient combined bioactivity and MoA screening of antibiotic producer strains. The bioreporter assay employs selected biomarkers indicative of interference with the main bacterial metabolic pathways and thereby enables to selectively follow up and prioritize metabolic activities of interest (5). This MoA-based bioreporter assay was used to screen strains from the Tübingen actinomycetes strain collection for novel natural compounds (5). Preceding this study, the Tübingen strain collection had been subjected to a bioactivity test using the newly developed 96-well microplate system, designed to rapidly screen actinomycetes strain collections in agar plug assays (6). From a set of 500 natural product producers, 270 strains showed antibiotic activity against B. subtilis and were tested against the bioreporter panel sensing different types of metabolic stresses. Thereby, the bioreporter B. subtilis PbmrC-lacZ selectively responded to ribosomal stalling as a metabolic stress signal (5). Overall, six strains from the Tübingen strain collection, namely Tü 2975, Tü 3180, Tü 6430, KNN 49.3e, Tü 2108, and A 4/2 induced the B. subtilis PbmrC-lacZ bioreporter and were shown to produce protein synthesis inhibitors (PSIs), whereby Tü 2975 produced pristinamycin, Tü 3180 griseoviridin/viridogrisein, Tü 6430 pactamycin, KNN 49.3e amicetin, Tü 2108 berninamycin C, and A 4/2 cycloheximide (5). Cycloheximide was probably found rather accidentally, as A 4/2 only caused an ambiguous signal in the bioreporter assay and cycloheximide is known to act as eukaryotic PSI exclusively. In general, the bioreporter panel proved to be a highly efficient and sensitive tool for rapid compound identification and target deconvolution and allowed to identify natural products from strains of the Tübingen strains collection that had not been assigned to them before. Other discovery efforts focus e.g. on data mining strategies involving genetic and analytical tools to exploit the so far hidden biosynthetic potential of the microbial natural compound producers. The most recent advances and achievements with a special focus on genome-guided discovery efforts have just recently been reviewed by Scherlach and Hertweck (7). Regarding the antibiotic production capacity, actinomycetes are recognized as the most important source since they are the origin of up to 70% of today's therapeutically applied antibiotic agents (8–10). Even if these microorganisms have been extensively exploited over the past decades, they are still valuable sources for novel natural compounds. Bioinformatic analysis of >170 000 bacterial genomes and several thousand metagenome sequences suggests that overall only 3% of the genomic potential for natural product biosynthesis has been discovered so far and that especially the genus Streptomyces, belonging to the heterogeneous group of the actinomycetes, has a huge untapped potential for the production of novel secondary metabolites (11). The antibiotic encoding genes are usually organized as biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) in the genome of the producer strains (12). On average, Streptomyces genomes harbor 40 BGC (13), whereby the majority (∼90%) of all clusters is suggested to be silent, implying that the respective antibiotics are not produced under standard lab conditions (14). Bioinformatic tools and databases, such as antiSMASH, enable the prediction of BGCs in genome sequences (15) and allow genome mining of natural compound producers. Producer strains can be prioritized bioinformatically, e.g. by screening genome sequences for potential self-resistance genes. Specialized tools and databases such as the ‘Antibiotic Resistant Target Seeker’ (ARTS) allow for an automated prediction for potential resistance genes (16). The scientific background behind this data-mining attempt is that self-resistance mechanisms of natural compound producers can provide information of the MoA of the produced bioactive compound and can help to identify the encoding BGCs. For example, the molecular target of the cystobactamids was identified by studying the self-resistance mechanism in the myxobacterial producer organism Cystobacter sp. (17). Here, the gene cysO encodes a putative protein belonging to a family of pentapeptide repeat protein with a proven resistance function against type II topoisomerase drugs. cysO is part of the cystobactamid BGC and the implied function as potential resistance factor against type II topoisomerase drugs paved the way to disclose the MoA of the new family of cystobactamid antibiotics as topoisomerase inhibitors (18). The cystobactamid example shows that the search for potential resistance genes can help predict the MoA of the associated antibiotic and identify its encoding BGC. A similar example is shown by the anticancer agent salinosporamide A from Salinispora tropica CNB-440, a compound identified as a proteasome inhibitor due to the presence of a redundant proteasome subunit gene as part of the salinosporamide BGC (19). Following up on this observation, 86 Salinispora genomes were browsed for the occurrence of duplicated housekeeping genes that co-localized with BGCs. Thereby, a thiotetronic acid antibiotic BGC was found to be co-localized with a putative fatty acid synthase (FAS) resistance gene, which disclosed the MoA of the thiotetronic acid compounds as FAS inhibitors (20). Accordingly, for the antibiotics novobiocin (gyrase B), platensin (FabB/F) and griselimycin (DnaN), it is known that target-duplicated resistance genes are co-clustered with their encoding BGCs. These examples demonstrate the rationale of target-directed genome mining strategies (20). ARTS is a computational tool that takes this observation into account and enables the computer-aided search for potential self-resistance genes in bacterial genome sequences (21). ARTS predicts putative resistance genes based on three criteria: (i) duplication of genes, (ii) localization within a BGC and (iii) evidence for a horizontal gene transfer event (HGT). A defined set of core (‘housekeeping’) genes is used as a reference to identify essential core genes, defines duplication thresholds and infers HGT events. Traceability of HGT was implemented as a search criterion since antibiotic resistance genes are often transferred via HGT amongst bacteria and transfer events can be deduced from differences in the codon usage or GC content of DNA sequences compared to the rest of the genome (16). Altogether, ARTS represents an innovative tool that allows for a target-directed genome mining approach. Based on the above-mentioned knowledge on BGC identification, we aimed to establish a genome sequence-based strategy to prioritize natural compound producers with a special emphasis on producers of PSIs. We focused on PSIs since the bacterial ribosome is a hotspot for many successful antibiotics, involving important drugs from different compound classes, e.g. aminoglycosides, macrolides, tetracyclines, lincosamides, pleuromutilins thiopeptides, or streptogramins (22). The bacterial ribosome is one of the most conserved functional units of the bacterial cell. It consists of the small 30S and the large 50S subunit, whereby the subunits are made up of >50 ribosomal proteins (r-proteins) and three rRNAs (23S, 16S and 5S). Ribosomal RNA represents the main target for antibiotics (23). A prominent example of a PSI is the aminoglycoside antibiotic streptomycin, which inhibits protein synthesis by interacting with the 16S rRNA and 20 ribosomal proteins of the 30S subunit (24). Streptomycin irreversibly binds to the 16S rRNA and the S12 protein, which are the main target sites (25). It inhibits the initiation process of protein synthesis (26) and causes decoding errors, which result in incorrect amino acids being incorporated into the nascent polypeptide chain (27). An example of a 50S subunit-binding PSI is the oxazolidinone antibiotic linezolid, which inhibits protein synthesis by binding to the peptidyl transferase center (PTC) of the ribosomal 50S subunit. Linezolid binds to the A-site of the PTC, interacting with various 23S rRNA nucleotides and the ribosomal S3 protein (28). Although the bacterial ribosome is a target for numerous different antibiotics, not all promising binding sites are therapeutically exploited so far, as exemplified by the PSIs evernimicin and negamycin. Negamycin is a small pseudopeptide with potent bioactivity against Gram-negative bacteria, which binds at a position near the A-site of the 30S subunit of the bacterial ribosome next to the binding site of the well-known PSI tetracycline (29). Evernimicin is an oligosaccharide antibiotic, which interacts with a specific set of nucleotides of the 23S rRNA of the 50S subunit, which are distinct from the binding sites of other known ribosome-targeting substances (30). To search for novel natural compounds, which bind to the ribosome as a target, we have developed an in silico approach that allows to mine genomes for the occurrence and accumulation of protein synthesis associated-self-resistance genes. This method is called 'psi' protein synthesis inhibitor target gene footprinting = Ψ-footprinting. The method was validated by analyzing numerous genome sequences of known and recently identified PSI producers and then challenged with over 400 actinomycetes genomes from the DSMZ strain collection. From these, 15 strains were selected and probed for the production of natural compounds by HPLC-MS and protein synthesis inhibiting bioactivities by in vitro transcription/translation assays. For 12 of the 15 strains, protein synthesis inhibiting bioactivity was detected and for four of them the PSI was identified, proving the predictive power of the Ψ-footprinting approach.