1. Introduction Ivermectin (IVM) is classically an anti-parasitic macrocyclic lactone (ML) that acts on glutamate-gated chloride channels to induce hyperpolarization/paralysis of the cells, and thus results in death of the cell/parasite [1]. IVM is known as a miracle drug since it has shown activities against a wide range of targets [2]. For example, IVM inhibits sporogony and shows an activity against Plasmodium falciparum [3]. More promisingly, IVM has exhibited in vitro antiviral activities against a wide range of RNA and DNA viruses, including avian influenza A virus, dengue virus, West Nile virus, human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV), Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, and pseudorabies virus [4,5]. In addition, IVM has shown anticancer potential in several studies by either inhibiting the tubulin proteins from disassembling (disturbing the tubulin equilibrium) or acting as an antimitotic agent or by chloride dependent membrane hyperpolarization [6,7,8,9]. Further, IVM has shown an activity against a number of bacteria, including the resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Mycobacterium ulcerans [10,11]. Clinically, IVM has been used against different helminth and other parasitic infections both in animal and human medicine throughout the globe. Staphylococci are Gram-positive cocci having more than 30 species and among them Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) is the most devastating [4]. The significance of S. aureus can be envisaged by the fact that more than 30% of the population across the globe are silent carriers [12]. Although most of these individuals are asymptomatic, S. aureus can initiate many disease pathologies ranging from skin infections to severe life-threatening diseases in a wide variety of host species and S. aureus is the leading cause of bacteremia in humans [13]. To this end, World Health Organization (WHO) has classified S. aureus resistant to methicillin and vancomycin as one of the microorganisms that immediately require new antibiotics for successful therapy. S. aureus infections are also of significant importance in the animal health sector as it is one of the most common microorganisms that causes mastitis in the dairy industry [14]. Infections by S. aureus are prevalent all over the world and treatment of this notorious bug has been difficult due to emergence of antibiotic resistance. β-lactams were extensively used to treat S. aureus infections as the first line of defense in the past. However, they have slowly lost efficacy. Due to widespread resistance against them, a semi-synthetic penicillinase resistant β-lactam, i.e., methicillin, was introduced as an alternative to overcome the cleavage of these natural β-lactams by β-lactamases. Unfortunately, resistance developed against methicillin soon after its introduction [15]. Consequently, methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) are prevalent throughout the globe [16] and they are often resistant to most of the known antibiotics. To this end, different efflux pump inhibitors have been explored as a strategy to overcome antibiotic resistance in S. aureus species [17]. Recently, our group has shown that IVM has an activity against clinical isolates of S. aureus [4]. However, approximately 10% of isolates were resistant to IVM. We thus sought to decipher the possible mechanism behind this unprecedented observation. Hence, in the present study we aimed to dissect the molecular mechanisms of resistance of IVM against S. aureus (with a focus on efflux pumps/transporters) and the results might open new avenues to prolong the efficacy of IVM.