INTRODUCTION Streptomycetes are known for their complex developmental life cycle as well as for the multitude of secondary metabolites they produce, including important clinically used antibiotics. Morphological differentiation of the filamentous, multicellular bacteria is shaped by a variety of differentiation processes, which include the reorganization of chromosome segregation, cell division, and cell-wall assembly, as well as the formation of a sporulating aerial mycelium (1). In addition, morphological differentiation is coordinated with the extraordinary diverse secondary metabolism. Such complex developmental programs often rely on the activation or inactivation of regulators that may be conferred by transcriptional control, protein modifications, and/or regulated proteolysis. Energy-dependent degradation of short-lived regulators is one essential feature of the compartmentalized, tightly regulated bacterial caseinolytic protease Clp (2), which is intimately involved in the morphological differentiation of Streptomyces (3–6). The Clp protease typically consists of a barrel-shaped, tetradecameric ClpP core that associates with hexameric ATP-consuming unfoldases, so-called Clp-ATPases, for protein degradation (7). The tetradecameric ClpP core is built of two stacked heptameric rings to form the proteolytic chamber of the Clp protease, keeping the catalytic site residues (Ser97, His122, Asp171 in Escherichia coli) within the inner lumen of the barrel and away from the cytoplasm (8). Access to the proteolytic chamber is tightly regulated. To prevent undesired substrate degradation, substrate entry is only allowed via two axial pores, which are too small for protein passage. Consequently, in the absence of a cognate Clp-ATPase, ClpP lacks proteolytic activity and only degrades short peptides (9, 10). For regulated proteolysis, Clp-ATPases and associated adaptor proteins recognize natural Clp protease substrates, bind to the apical and/or distal surface of the ClpP core, and unfold and translocate the protein substrates under ATP consumption through the entrance pores into the proteolytic chamber of ClpP (11). Many bacterial species encode only a single ClpP homolog, thus forming homotetradecameric ClpP complexes, for instance, the model bacteria E. coli and Bacillus subtilis or pathogens like Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pneumoniae (8, 12–14). Other pathogenic bacteria, including mycobacteria, chlamydia, listeria, clostridia, and pseudomonads, possess two ClpP isoforms, i.e., ClpP1 and ClpP2, which may form homotetradecameric complexes of either ClpP1 or ClpP2 or heterotetradecameric complexes involving both ClpP homologs (15–20). Streptomycetes have an even more complex Clp system and mostly encode three or five ClpP homologs. Current knowledge of the Streptomyces Clp machinery is mainly based on studies using Streptomyces lividans cells. In this species, five clpP genes are organized in two bicistronic (clpP1clpP2 and clpP3clpP4) and one monocistronic (clpP5) operon (3, 21), whose expression was shown to be tightly controlled via several negative feedback loops (22–25). For example, in S. lividans wild-type cells, the degradation of the transcriptional activators ClgR and PopR depends on the presence of ClpP1 and ClpP2 (Fig. 1A). Here, ClgR induces the expression of ClpP1 and ClpP2, while the ClgR paralogue PopR is assumed to recruit the RNA polymerase for clpP3clpP4 transcription. As PopR was shown to be degraded by ClpP1 and ClpP2 in Streptomyces cells, PopR-mediated expression of the clpP3clpP4 operon is silenced in the presence of these two ClpP homologs (21–24). On the other hand, ClpP3 and ClpP4 are expressed in clpP1clpP2 deletion mutants due to the repealed degradation of PopR (21). In contrast to E. coli or B. subtilis, where the function of ClpP is not essential for survival, at least one functional copy of either clpP1clpP2 or clpP3clpP4 is essential for the viability of S. lividans (21). Thus, at least some functional redundancy seems to exist between the ClpP homologs in Streptomyces that might represent a rescue mechanism in case the function of ClpP1 and ClpP2 is disturbed or inhibited. FIG 1ClpP1 and ClpP2 form a heterotetradecameric core that interacts with the Clp-ATPases ClpX, ClpC1, and ClpC2 for protein degradation. (A) Clp protease-dependent regulatory network in Streptomyces. (B and C) In vitro protein degradation assays with purified Clp proteins indicate that the hydrolysis of protein substrates depends on the presence of ClpP1, ClpP2, and a partner Clp-ATPase. SDS-PAGE analyses of the degradation of the putative natural Clp substrates ClgR and PopR show that ClpX-mediated degradation of both substrates requires the presence of both ClpP1 and ClpP2 (B). Similarly, both ClpP1 and ClpP2 were required for ClpC2- or ClpC1-dependent digestion of β-casein (B) or FITC-casein (C), respectively. The hydrolysis of FITC-casein was recorded as an increase in fluorescence intensity (relative fluorescence units [RFU]) over time. Mean values (normalized to %) of initial linear reaction kinetics are given. Statistical analyses were performed with one-way ANOVA by using three biological replicates, each comprising three technical replicates. P > 0.05, nonsignificant (ns); ****, P ≤ 0.0001. Error bars indicate standard deviations. For SDS-PAGE images, representative examples of three replicates are shown. (D) Coelution of untagged ClpP1 and His6-tagged ClpP2 during Ni-NTA chromatography implies the interaction of the two ClpP homologs. Samples of the flowthrough (F), the second wash fraction (WII), and the elution fractions E2–E4 are depicted. The cell lysate used for chromatography was generated after coexpression of ClpP1 (blue asterisk) and ClpP2-His6 (green asterisks) from two distinct, IPTG-inducible T7 promoters in the pETDUET-vector system. SDS-PAGE and immunoblot using specific anti-His6 or anti-ClpP1 antibodies are shown. The three observed bands marked by the anti-His6 antibody correspond to full-length ClpP2 and processed variants (as discussed in a later section). Of note, the polyclonal anti-ClpP1 antiserum cross-reacted with ClpP2, which resulted in the detection of the same three bands as seen with the anti-His6 as well as an additional band that corresponds to ClpP1. Flowthrough (F) and second wash fraction (W II) of the affinity chromatography experiment indicate the clearance of unbound ClpP1. In a control pulldown experiment, untagged ClpP1 and 6his-tagged ClpP2 were applied separately to a Ni-NTA column. Here, ClpP1 was only detected in the flowthrough fraction (F), whereas ClpP2 was only detected in the elution fractions (E2–E4), thus proving the stringency of the pulldown assay. Assays were performed at least in triplicates, and representative SDS-PAGE images are shown. (E) Cross-linking experiments visualize the heteromeric ClpP1P2 complex. Employing the chemical cross-linker BS3, a protein band with the approximate size of a ClpP tetradecamer appeared only in samples containing both ClpP1 and ClpP2. This band was detected with anti-ClpP1 as well as anti-His6 antibodies. A sample containing both ClpP1 and ClpP2 in the absence of BS3 did not yield the tetradecamer band, suggesting rather transient interactions between ClpP1 and ClpP2. Assays were performed at least in triplicates, and representative native PAGE images are shown. (F) Overview of Clp-ATPase mediated substrate degradation experiments in combination with the proteolytic core ClpP1P2. Compare also degradation assays in Fig. S1. 0, +, ++ reflect the efficiency of substrate degradation by the distinct Clp protease, respectively. ClpP1 and ClpP2 form a heterotetradecameric core that interacts with the Clp-ATPases ClpX, ClpC1, and ClpC2 for protein degradation. (A) Clp protease-dependent regulatory network in Streptomyces. (B and C) In vitro protein degradation assays with purified Clp proteins indicate that the hydrolysis of protein substrates depends on the presence of ClpP1, ClpP2, and a partner Clp-ATPase. SDS-PAGE analyses of the degradation of the putative natural Clp substrates ClgR and PopR show that ClpX-mediated degradation of both substrates requires the presence of both ClpP1 and ClpP2 (B). Similarly, both ClpP1 and ClpP2 were required for ClpC2- or ClpC1-dependent digestion of β-casein (B) or FITC-casein (C), respectively. The hydrolysis of FITC-casein was recorded as an increase in fluorescence intensity (relative fluorescence units [RFU]) over time. Mean values (normalized to %) of initial linear reaction kinetics are given. Statistical analyses were performed with one-way ANOVA by using three biological replicates, each comprising three technical replicates. P > 0.05, nonsignificant (ns); ****, P ≤ 0.0001. Error bars indicate standard deviations. For SDS-PAGE images, representative examples of three replicates are shown. (D) Coelution of untagged ClpP1 and His6-tagged ClpP2 during Ni-NTA chromatography implies the interaction of the two ClpP homologs. Samples of the flowthrough (F), the second wash fraction (WII), and the elution fractions E2–E4 are depicted. The cell lysate used for chromatography was generated after coexpression of ClpP1 (blue asterisk) and ClpP2-His6 (green asterisks) from two distinct, IPTG-inducible T7 promoters in the pETDUET-vector system. SDS-PAGE and immunoblot using specific anti-His6 or anti-ClpP1 antibodies are shown. The three observed bands marked by the anti-His6 antibody correspond to full-length ClpP2 and processed variants (as discussed in a later section). Of note, the polyclonal anti-ClpP1 antiserum cross-reacted with ClpP2, which resulted in the detection of the same three bands as seen with the anti-His6 as well as an additional band that corresponds to ClpP1. Flowthrough (F) and second wash fraction (W II) of the affinity chromatography experiment indicate the clearance of unbound ClpP1. In a control pulldown experiment, untagged ClpP1 and 6his-tagged ClpP2 were applied separately to a Ni-NTA column. Here, ClpP1 was only detected in the flowthrough fraction (F), whereas ClpP2 was only detected in the elution fractions (E2–E4), thus proving the stringency of the pulldown assay. Assays were performed at least in triplicates, and representative SDS-PAGE images are shown. (E) Cross-linking experiments visualize the heteromeric ClpP1P2 complex. Employing the chemical cross-linker BS3, a protein band with the approximate size of a ClpP tetradecamer appeared only in samples containing both ClpP1 and ClpP2. This band was detected with anti-ClpP1 as well as anti-His6 antibodies. A sample containing both ClpP1 and ClpP2 in the absence of BS3 did not yield the tetradecamer band, suggesting rather transient interactions between ClpP1 and ClpP2. Assays were performed at least in triplicates, and representative native PAGE images are shown. (F) Overview of Clp-ATPase mediated substrate degradation experiments in combination with the proteolytic core ClpP1P2. Compare also degradation assays in Fig. S1. 0, +, ++ reflect the efficiency of substrate degradation by the distinct Clp protease, respectively. Clp-ATPase-dependent protein degradation and amino acid sequence alignment of ClpP homologs from Streptomyces sp, M. tuberculosis, and E. coli. (A) In vitro degradation of ClgR and PopR. As seen for ClpXP1P2 (Fig. 1B), ClgR was also digested by ClpC1P1P2 and ClpC2P1P2, although with reduced efficiency. PopR was efficiently digested by ClpX (Fig. 1B), still notably digested by ClpC2P1P2 but not by ClpC1P1P2. (B) In vitro degradation of the model substrate β-casein by ClpXP1P2 and ClpC1P1P2. β-casein is not a substrate of the Streptomyces ClpXP1P2 protease, while it was degraded by ClpC1P1P2 and ClpC2P1P2 (Fig. 1B). All assays were performed in triplicates, and representative SDS-PAGE images are shown. (C) FITC-casein degradation by ClpC1P1P2, ClpC2P1P2, ClpXP1P2, and ClpP1P2. Here, FITC-casein was significantly degraded by ClpC1P1P2, while ClpXP1P2, ClpC2P1P2, and ClpP1P2 showed no or only weak degradation of the substrate. Means of initial reaction kinetics are shown, normalized in %. Three biological replicates are shown each comprising three technical replicates. Statistics were performed with one-way ANOVA. ns, P > 0.05; ****, P ≤ 0.0001. Error bars indicate standard deviations. (D) The multiple amino acid sequence alignment shows the positions of the catalytic triad residues (marked by stars) as well as of the three conserved aromatic residues within the hydrophobic pocket that were subject to site-directed mutagenesis in this study (marked by squares). Predicted GUG initiating codons (instead of AUG) are indicated with a circle. The alignment was generated with the online tool clustalΩ (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalo/) using ClpP protein sequences derived from Streptomyces hawaiiensis NRRL 15010, Streptomyces lividans TK24, and Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). Sequence identities were computed using Jalview Software (80). In each column, the percentage of amino acid residues that agree with the consensus sequence is visualized from dark blue (>80%) to marine (>60%) to pale blue (>40%). A comparison of the protein sequences of ClpP1 or ClpP2 from S. hawaiiensis and S. lividans using BLAST (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) revealed sequence identities of 97% for ClpP1 and 95% for ClpP2 between the two species. (E) Multiple sequence alignment of ClpP proteins from Streptomyces sp, M. tuberculosis, and E. coli illustrates amino acid residues, which are known to interact with the natural product ADEP1 (indicated by arrows) (34, 35). The alignment was generated with the online tool clustalΩ (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalo/). Sequence identities were computed using Jalview Software (80). In each column, the percentage of amino acid residues that agree with the consensus sequence are visualized from dark blue (>80%) to marine (>60%) to pale blue (>40%). Download FIG S1, PDF file, 2.6 MB. Despite the importance of the Clp system for streptomycetes, data on the exact molecular function of their Clp protease complex is scarce. In the current study, we set out to reconstitute and characterize the Clp system of Streptomyces hawaiiensis NRRL 15010 in vitro, which has the same clpP operon organization as S. lividans (26). S. hawaiiensis is of particular interest since it is the producer of antibiotic acyldepsipeptide 1 (ADEP1), the natural product progenitor of the potent class of ADEP antibiotics that bind to and deregulate the Clp protease complex (26–31). We here present the molecular composition of the housekeeping Clp protease in Streptomyces, which consists of a heterotetradecameric ClpP1P2 core that interacts with corresponding Clp-ATPases solely via ClpP2. It is the first report on the full Streptomyces Clp protease machinery operating in vitro, including two ClpP isoforms and three Clp-ATPases working together to degrade natural Clp protease substrates as well as model substrates. In addition, our data assign a new, yet unprecedented mechanism of action to ADEP antibiotics, which is the accelerated degradation of natural Clp protease substrates as a result of the concomitant binding of ADEP and Clp-ATPase to opposite sides of the ClpP core.