1. Introduction Terrestrial and marine Streptomyces strains play an important role in new drug discovery and development since they harbor a huge number of secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) to make a diverse array of bioactive substances with therapeutic potential [1,2]. Streptomyces bacteria are known to produce numerous natural products, most of which are clinically useful compounds with antibacterial, antifungal, anticancer, immunosuppressive, and other properties. It is well known that daptomycin is a cyclic lipopeptide antibiotic derived from the organism Streptomyces roseosporus [3], rapamycin is used as immunosuppressive metabolite from actinomycete species [4], and avermectins are a series of drugs and pesticides from Streptomyces avermitilis [5]. However, the misuse and overuse of existing antibiotics in human medical practice is liable to cause seriously antimicrobial resistance, which has emerged as one of the leading public health threats around the world [6]. Therefore, there is an urgent need to constantly search for new drug candidates to alleviate this deteriorative tendency. In the post-genomic era, the accumulation of genomic and transcriptomic information is accelerating and has revealed that the metabolic capacity of virtually all organisms is vastly underappreciated. Genome mining is one of the effective strategies to increase the discovery rate and facilitate the characterization of novel compounds and their biosynthetic pathways [7]. Chrysomycin analogs are one group of glycosides with a benzonaphthopyranone structure obtained from several Streptomyces strains [8,9], which display a broad spectrum of biological properties, including anti-phage, anti-bacterial, and cytotoxic activities [10,11,12,13]. Especially, chrysomycin A (Figure 1) showed a potent inhibitory effect on multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR) Mycobacterium tuberculosis, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE) [13,14,15,16]. Chrysomycin A was originally isolated from strain Streptomyces A-419 in 1955 as a mixture with chrysomycin B [10]. Strain 891 was derived from sediments of the South China Sea and found to produce chrysomycin A under optimal conditions with the highest yield (3600 mg/L) among all documented strains (Table S1) [17]. In order to decipher and characterize genomic features of this marine strain, whole genome sequencing and analysis were well conducted in this work, and the BGC responsible for the synthesis of chrysomycin was extensively analyzed. To our knowledge, it is the first report on bioinformative analysis of a chrysomycin-producing Streptomyces strain.