1. Introduction Vertebrates colonized a broad range of habitats with varying ecological conditions (e.g., lighting conditions, oxygen content, and water salinity). This process was associated with adaptations to these varied environments. Adaptive evolution is a process by which advantageous phenotypes, i.e., traits which increase fitness, are propagated through positive selection or environmentally induced variation [1]. Advantageous traits are determined by evolutionary pressures and habitat dynamics; consequently, a phenotype that is advantageous in certain ecological contexts might be neutral or deleterious in others. Adaptive evolutionary processes occur in two general steps: (1) variation arises and (2) advantageous phenotype is propagated and maintained in the population. Genetic variation arises from mutations that can occur due to single base changes, insertions, deletions, and duplications [2]. Mutations can have multiple implications, from pseudogenization to de novo emergence of genes and/or regulatory elements (Figure 1 and Table 1). Mutations can give rise to novel phenotypes, and the advantageous ones become propagated in a population [2]. Thus, functionally important genomic regions are assumed to be highly conserved and adaptive alleles undergo rapid fixation [3,4]. The conserved nature of these functionally important elements can be used to identify them as being adaptive. As novel approaches continue to emerge, we are now able not only to identify positive selection on genomic regions but also to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying adaptive phenotypes. The aim of this systematic review is to discuss specific examples of molecular mechanisms driving adaptive evolution in vertebrates in response to ecological factors, such as differences in lighting conditions, aquatic and terrestrial environments, extreme conditions, diet diversification, pathogens, reproductive adaptations, and others. We focus here on recent studies on adaptive evolution (from 2016 to 2022), which were not covered by earlier reviews on this topic [1,2]. A more recent review [5] was focused specifically on adaptive convergent evolution, while the current review has a broader scope, providing descriptions of the molecular mechanisms involved in the emergence of adaptive variation.