INTRODUCTION Bacteriophages are viruses that prey upon bacteria. Facing the existential threat posed by phage predation, prokaryotes have developed numerous lines of defense, which together form the prokaryotic “immune system” (1). In response, phages have evolved a multitude of ways to circumvent these barriers, thereby fostering the diversification of bacterial antiviral strategies. Recent bioinformatics-guided screenings revealed a large number of previously unknown antiviral defense systems (2, 3). However, the majority of currently known prokaryotic defense systems rely on a wide range of molecular mechanisms but are mediated mainly by protein or RNA complexes (4). Environmental bacteria produce a wide range of small molecules, conferring producer cells a specific fitness advantage in competitive or predatory interactions. However, the potential antiphage role of this extensive chemical repertoire remains largely unexplored. Recently, new types of defense systems that rely on small molecules rather than on proteins or RNA have been discovered (5, 6). Anthracyclines are secondary metabolites naturally produced by Streptomyces species and were shown to inhibit infection by double-stranded-DNA (dsDNA) phages (5). These molecules act as DNA-intercalating agents and block the replication of phage—but not bacterial—DNA. Since these secondary metabolites are excreted by Streptomyces cells and are diffusible molecules, their production may provide broad protection against dsDNA phages at the community level. In nature, producers of secondary metabolites are generally resistant to the molecules they synthesize (7, 8). This feature is of special importance when screening small molecules for antiviral properties, as toxic effects on bacterial growth would prevent the appreciation of any inhibition of phage infection. In this study, we leveraged this principle to look for phage inhibition by secondary metabolites, using bacterial hosts resistant to the compounds tested. Aminoglycosides are antibiotics well known for their bactericidal effect by targeting the 30S subunit of the ribosome and thereby either directly inhibiting protein synthesis or, for most aminoglycosides, promoting mistranslation. The aminoglycoside streptomycin, discovered in 1943, was the first antibiotic active against Mycobacterium tuberculosis (9). Strikingly, we observed strong phage inhibition in the presence of aminoglycosides when using strains resistant to the antibiotic. In agreement with this observation, decades-old reports described the inhibition of various phages by streptomycin (10–12). However, the biological significance of these observations was not explored, and the underlying mechanism of action remains unclear. For these reasons, we focused our efforts on aminoglycosides and set out to investigate their potential antiphage properties. In this study, we show that aminoglycoside antibiotics inhibit phages infecting the actinobacterial model species Streptomyces venezuelae and Corynebacterium glutamicum as well as the λ phage infecting Escherichia coli. Investigations of the mechanism of action point toward a blockage of phage infection occurring after DNA injection but before genome replication. Furthermore, the antiphage activity observed with the purified aminoglycoside apramycin could be reproduced with supernatants from the natural producer Streptoalloteichus tenebrarius, suggesting a broad physiological significance of the antiphage properties of aminoglycosides.