Introduction Myxobacteria are generalist predators that help recycle soil nutrients and shape microbial community structure (Johnke et al., 2014; Li et al., 2017; Nair and Velicer, 2021; Petters et al., 2021). Unlike obligate predatory bacteria, like Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus, which invade prey cells individually, myxobacteria are social predators capable of extracellular lysis of prey and subsequent swarming to claim released biomacromolecules for nutrition (Perez et al., 2016; Thiery and Kaimer, 2020). This swarming motility and other cooperative features such as fruiting body formation make myxobacteria an excellent model for investigation of multicellularity (Shimkets et al., 2006; Zusman et al., 2007; Bretl and Kirby, 2016; Munoz-Dorado et al., 2016; Schumacher and Sogaard-Andersen, 2017). During predation, myxobacteria secrete a combination of lytic enzymes and toxic, specialized (also referred to as secondary) metabolites to lyse prey microbes (Xiao et al., 2011; Thiery and Kaimer, 2020; Arend et al., 2021). A type IV filament-like Kil protein from Myxococcus xanthus has also been found to enable contact-dependent predation (Seef et al., 2021). Deemed “gifted” due to extraordinarily large genomes densely packed with specialized metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) (Baltz, 2017a,b, 2019, 2021), myxobacteria are a coveted source of lead compounds for drug discovery (Landwehr et al., 2016; Herrmann et al., 2017; Bader et al., 2020). These various attributes of myxobacteria combined with a global presence in soils and marine sediments (Dawid, 2000; Petters et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021b) engender broad multidisciplinary interest, and predation is a unifying theme across disciplines. Antibiotic discovery associated with predatory lifestyles (Panter et al., 2018), evolution during predator–prey interactions (Nair et al., 2019), predatory nutrient cycling in soils (Petters et al., 2021), and the application of myxobacteria as biocontrol agents (Ye et al., 2020) are all examples of predation-aligned research. This review utilizes discoveries across disciplines to discuss ongoing investigation of myxobacterial predatory performance. Few studies have thoroughly established the prey range of individual myxobacteria, and even fewer have compared predatory capacity across myxobacterial taxa. Ranking predatory performance of 17 strains of M. xanthus using a cohort of 12 prey bacteria, Morgan et al. reported specialized predatory performance on individual prey species (Morgan et al., 2010). The authors suggest that predatory specialization may result from predator or prey adaptations due to higher environmental encounter rates. A broader investigation of prey range, including 113 environmental isolates of myxobacteria and clinically relevant prey bacteria, revealed predatory activity to be unrelated to phylogeny (Livingstone et al., 2017). These examples suggest that predator–prey interactions incur dynamic, rapid phenotypic variation and environmental specialization of generalist predators. Herein, we provide inferences and challenges associated with determining predatory performance as well as factors known to influence myxobacterial predation. Conjectured association of specialized metabolism and predation Although over 100 unique metabolites and 500 analogs have been reported by drug discovery efforts from myxobacteria (Herrmann et al., 2017), only two metabolites have been determined to benefit predation directly (Figure 1A). Genetic knockouts of the myxovirescin hybrid polyketide synthase (PKS)-nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) BGC resulted in mutant M. xanthus strains defective in killing Escherichia coli compared to myxovirescin-producing strains (Xiao et al., 2011). Similarly, random transposon insertion revealed that the non-ribosomal peptide myxoprincomide contributes to M. xanthus predation of Bacillus subtilis (Muller et al., 2016). Although not directly shown to impact predation, co-cultivation of epothilone-producing and non-producing Sorangium strains resulted in increased production of the antifungal metabolite (Li et al., 2013, 2014). Li et al. suggest increased epothilone production during co-cultivation to be a cooperative predation mechanism between Sorangium strains to consume fungal competitors. Despite the limited evidence that predation benefits from discovered antibiotics, predatory lifestyles are often cited as a motivating factor for continued drug discovery from myxobacteria (Korp et al., 2016; Perez et al., 2020). Currently, there is no clear correlation between antibiotic repertoire and predatory performance of myxobacteria. Pan-genome and predatory range analysis of 23 Corallococcus spp. revealed incongruencies between BGC content and predation (Livingstone et al., 2018b). The authors suggest that predation is partially dependent on horizontally acquired genes in the accessory pan-genome of Corallococcus spp. Coinciding with the previously mentioned prey range study, both predator and prey phylogeny fail to predict predatory activity (Livingstone et al., 2017). Interestingly, a metabolomic study surveying ~2,300 myxobacterial extracts observed a correlation between detected specialized metabolites and taxonomic distance (Hoffmann et al., 2018). Essentially, hierarchical clustering of metabolite profiles from axenically grown myxobacteria mapped to taxonomy with genus-level clustering and species-level clustering of Myxococcus spp. While the metabolic profiles and phylogeny of myxobacteria are correlated, predatory performance is not predictable from predator or prey phylogeny. These studies provide a compelling disconnect from the assumption that specialized metabolites primarily benefit predation. Axenic cultivation conditions used by Hoffman et al. to generate myxobacterial extracts conceivably limit ecological relevance. However, a transcriptomic study focused on M. xanthus predation of E. coli revealed that the predator was constitutively toxic in the presence/absence of prey and instead regulated feeding when exposed to macromolecular nutrients from pre-lysed prey (Livingstone et al., 2018a). We suggest that horizontally-acquired BGCs unique to individual strains of myxobacteria may account for species-level predatory specialization. Although, the large sizes of modular BGC-types known to benefit predation [83 kb myxovirescin BGC (Simunovic et al., 2006), 48 kb myxoprincomide BGC (Cortina et al., 2012)] possibly limit horizontal gene transfer, other predatory elements such as lytic enzymes, outer-membrane vesicles, and contact-dependent features are better suited for adaptive specialization. Further investigation of pan-genome plasticity and adaptability of secondary metabolism is required to determine if predatory specialization impacts metabolic profiles of myxobacteria. Perhaps, the role of specialized metabolites in prey killing is overstated. During co-culture conditions between the myxobacteria Sorangium cellulosum and M. xanthus, S. cellulosum prevents M. xanthus fruiting body formation (Marcos-Torres et al., 2020; Figure 1B). The antifungal metabolite ambruticin VS-3 produced by S. cellulosum inhibits M. xanthus fruiting body formation and interrupts induction of sporulation during starvation conditions. Marcos-Torres et al. suggest that induction of M. xanthus sporulation despite nutrient availability enables S. cellulosum to outcompete the neighboring predator. Differences in secondary metabolite profiles have been implicated in a similar inhibition of sporulation during intraspecific competition between M. xanthus strains (Fiegna and Velicer, 2005; Krug et al., 2008). Monitoring territoriality between M. xanthus and Myxococcus virescens, Smith and Dworkin proposed that secreted bacteriocins afford M. virescens a competitive advantage over M. xanthus (McCurdy and MacRae, 1974; Smith and Dworkin, 1994). These observations present an alternative role of specialized metabolites during predator competition for nutrients. Production of the ubiquitous, volatile terpene geosmin by M. xanthus during exponential growth serves as a warning signal to dissuade the bacteriophagous nematode Caenorhabditis elegans (Zaroubi et al., 2022; Figure 1B). The geosmin BGC is also present in genomes from nearly every sequenced myxobacteria as well as many other natural product-producing bacteria (Gregory et al., 2019). This provides an example of myxobacteria using specialized metabolite production defensively as prey to discourage predatory nematodes. Altogether, the premise that predatory myxobacteria are an excellent source of therapeutic leads holds regardless of utility, and incongruencies between predatory performance and specialized metabolism combined with limited examples of predation-influencing metabolites impede genetic determination of prey range from biosynthetic capacity. Figure 1Roles of specialized metabolites in myxobacterial predator–prey interactions. (A) Metabolites and metabolic transformations that benefit predation of prey (Xiao et al., 2011; Muller et al., 2016; Sutton et al., 2019; Akbar et al., 2022). (B) Myxobacterial metabolites not directly involved in predation of prey (Marcos-Torres et al., 2020; Zaroubi et al., 2022). (C) Prey metabolites and metabolic transformations that inhibit myxobacterial predation (Bull et al., 2002; Muller et al., 2014; Sutton et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019). Roles of specialized metabolites in myxobacterial predator–prey interactions. (A) Metabolites and metabolic transformations that benefit predation of prey (Xiao et al., 2011; Muller et al., 2016; Sutton et al., 2019; Akbar et al., 2022). (B) Myxobacterial metabolites not directly involved in predation of prey (Marcos-Torres et al., 2020; Zaroubi et al., 2022). (C) Prey metabolites and metabolic transformations that inhibit myxobacterial predation (Bull et al., 2002; Muller et al., 2014; Sutton et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019).