1. Introduction 1.1. Fungal Secondary Metabolites as Biopharmaceuticals of Tomorrow Bacteria, plants, and filamentous fungi are capable of producing many chemically diverse bioactive substances, referred to as natural products or secondary metabolites (SMs) [1]. Probably the most prominent of these fungal bioactive compounds is penicillin from Penicillium rubens, discovered by Alexander Fleming in 1929 [2,3] which initiated the “antibiotic revolution” that lead to a major paradigm shift in the treatment of patients [4]. Many fungi and their SMs made it into pharmaceutical application, such as cyclosporin from Tolypocladium inflatum which is used as an immunosuppressant [5,6], or lovastatin as a treatment for coronary heart diseases produced by Aspergillus terreus [7]. Other fields of application for microbial-derived natural products are the food industry (e.g., soy sauce, sake, and miso by Aspergillus oryzae or citric acid by Aspergillus niger [8]), the agricultural sector (biocontrol agents [9,10,11], growth hormones [12]) and many others [13,14,15,16]. The ever-rising demand due to the emergence of multi-resistant pathogens and resistant cancer types underscores the importance of mining new bioactive substances from fungal sources [17]. SMs are per definition not essential for growth but may provide selective advantages for the producing organism upon specific environmental challenges: e.g., pH stress (acids and alkaline substances [18]), temperature stress (regulators of membrane fluidity [19]), oxidative stress (antioxidants [20]), UV protection (pigments [21]), microbial warfare (antimicrobials [22]), communication (e.g., quorum sensing via homoserine lactones [23]), pathogenicity and host-infection (effectors or virulence factors [24,25]), support of ion uptake (sideophore production for iron acquisition [26]). As versatile as these functions are, as diverse are the chemical properties of such natural products. Not surprisingly, most of them are only produced under defined environmental or developmental conditions implying a complex regulation at the molecular level [27]. The blueprints for such bioactive substances are stored in biosynthetic genes that are, in most cases, physically linked in fungal genomes and together with genes for regulators and transporters sometimes constitute very large BGCs [28,29]. These BGCs are silenced by default through heterochromatic structures at the chromosomal level, but once activated by the specific signal, they work similar to an orchestrated factory to produce the cluster-specific compound. Bioinformatic tools have been developed that predict fungal BGCs based on whole-genome sequence data and these predictions show that so far sequenced fungi harbor between ~15 and 50 BGCs, but up to more than 80 BGCs have also been predicted in some genomes [28,30]. However, as outlined above, most of them are transcriptionally silent under standard laboratory conditions and hence the majority of associated natural products are not known [27]. 1.2. Genomic Organization and Evolution of BGCs Depending on the so-called backbone or key enzyme(s) involved in the biosynthesis, SMs are categorized according to the chemical families. They belong to e.g., polyketides, non-ribosomal peptides, terpenes and alkaloids or prenylated tryptophan derivates. Accordingly, they are synthesized by polyketide synthases (PKSs; further divided into highly reducing (HR-PKS) and non-reducing (NR-PKS)), non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs), terpene cyclases (TCs) and dimethylallyltryptophan synthases (DMATSs) or hybrids of them [28,29]. Next to the backbone enzyme-encoding gene(s) BGCs often harbor genes involved in self-resistance against a potentially toxic SM produced by the BGC, transport of precursors, intermediates, or the resulting compound [31,32], transcriptional activation of the biosynthetic genes, and often so-called tailoring or decorating enzymes that modify the structure of the chemical scaffold compound released by the backbone enzyme (e.g., P450 monooxygenases, methyltransferases, hydroxylases, epimerases, etc. [29]). A few exceptions exist that deviate from this standard configuration. For example, in Fusarium graminearum, polyketide synthase PKS8 was shown to be a stand-alone gene that is responsible for the synthesis of gibepyrone A [33], while the kojic acid BGC from Aspergillus oryzae does not have a backbone enzyme-encoding gene at all [34]. In other cases, the formation of superclusters was observed which encode for several independently synthesized biosynthetic products [35]. The opposite was also observed, where several BGCs or genes from distinct genomic locations communicate with each other to synthesize one product [36]. Fungi exhibit a very diversified and specialized chemical repertoire. The diversification of BGCs increases with the phylogenetic distance [37,38] but in some cases, it can even be observed within the same or closely related species, which was shown for Aspergillus fumigatus [39,40], Aspergillus niger [41] as well as between A. oryzae and its close relative Aspergillus flavus [42]. Constant interactions with other microorganisms and environmental conditions promote the intra and interspecies diversification process by exerting positive or negative selective pressure on BGCs in that specific ecosystem. If a BGC is non-essential or not beneficial in a certain microenvironment it is likely to acquire deleterious mutations or even gene loss over time [43]. A comparison of isolates from the same species but separated microenvironments revealed the emergence of different ecotypes as observed during population genetics studies on Streptomyces [44] and Umbilicaria pustulata [45]. BGCs are differently affected by evolution compared to the rest of the genome. They are located outside of so-called syntenic blocks, i.e., their position within the genome, and the BGC itself is less conserved than the rest of the genome [46,47]. In support of this, many BGCs were found to be enriched in sub-telomeric regions which are known to be hotspots for recombination [48]. This was shown in Sclerotinia sclerotium [49], Magnaporthe oryzae [50,51], A. fumigatus [52], and Zymoseptoria tritici [53]. From an evolutionary perspective, the ability to quickly adapt to new environmental challenges is fundamental for the survival of an organism. In the case of fungi and other microbes, this means that they can adapt and change their metabolomic arsenal fast enough to properly compete against other microbes or environmental changes. This implies that the relevant genomic regions and hence the genes situated in these regions (i.e., BGCs) experience regular mutations (single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) such as missense, nonsense, frameshift, or gain/loss of function) and genomic rearrangements as for instance gene duplications, gene or BGC loss, BGC rearrangements, pseudogenization events and also the acquisition of genetic material via horizontal gene transfer [43]. Organisms that acquire beneficial mutations will surpass others that experience disadvantageous ones whereby the environmental context decides if a certain mutation is beneficial or not. Microbial competition is not only about having the “best weaponry” but also about defense, resource efficiency, and denying beneficial effects to competitors. This not only implies gain of function or the de novo assembly of a BGC but also reductive genomic evolution which led to the “Black Queen Hypothesis” (BQH) [54]. The BQH considers that selective pressure can lead to the loss of a gene or function if that gene is dispensable (which makes it more energy efficient not to have it), or if the gene product would give a competitor more benefits than the producing organism itself. For the artificial activation of silent BGCs in a laboratory context, this means that some of the BGCs will carry deleterious mutations or even miss whole genes that would be necessary for the biosynthesis of the BGC product. In these cases, solely transcriptional activation will not suffice. Close examination of the BGC of interest can already unveil if genes carry a premature stop codon or if homologous BGCs indicate missing genes or frameshift mutations. A possible workaround in these scenarios is the exchange of single genes by their homologs or the genetic repair of a nonsense mutation as performed by Burkhardt et al. with the STC5 gene in Fusarium fujikuroi [55]. Multiple genomic, inter-species, and environmental factors contribute to this elevated diversification and evolution of BGCs. The occurrence of mutations and genomic rearrangements depend on many exogenous (e.g., radiation, heat, chemicals, environmental conditions, …) and endogenous factors (e.g., errors in DNA damage repair, or active transposable elements). As stated above, BGCs and pathogenicity-related genes are often in polymorphic regions that are prone to such events (e.g., sub-telomeric regions). Transposable elements (TEs) play an important role during evolution and also in the de novo assembly of BGCs. In Verticillium dahliae it was found that BGC and pathogenicity-related genes are often located close to transposable elements [56]. In a comparative study within Aspergillus fumigatus isolates, horizontally transferred BGCs, BGC idiomorphs (i.e., different BGCs in the same genomic location), and BGCs that are present in different genomic locations within the same or closely related species) are often flanked by TEs [39]. Similar findings were also found between A. oryzae and A flavus where two strain isolates had different BGCs in the same genomic locus [42] or in the case of several Botrytis species where the BOT BGC, involved in botrydial biosynthesis, was present at four different genomic locations across seven examined species [57,58]. When analyzing BGC genes and TE co-occurrence in Sclerotinia, they found that the overall co-occurrence of BGC genes and TEs is not significantly enhanced. Upon closer examination, however, it became evident that a subset of BGC genes, which is enriched in key-enzyme encoding genes, is co-occurrent with TEs and that genes in this subset often derive from recent gene duplication events [49]. BGC genes near TEs, therefore, were found less conserved than BGC genes more distal to the TE. All these findings point towards a TE-dependent heterogeneous evolution of BGCs (i.e., genes near TEs have an increased “evolutionary speed”). In the case of BGC prediction, TEs are, to our knowledge, not yet a considered factor, although it seems that these motives could very likely be good indicators for the presence of a BGC. Furthermore, TEs are probably also important factors for the de novo assembly of BGCs. De novo assembly is hypothesized to be a two-step process. The first step starts with the framework establishment of the new metabolic pathway [59]. Often, this is accomplished by horizontal gene transfer, as shown for the sterigmatocystin cluster from A. nidulans to Podospora [60], or the transfer of the bikaverin BGC from Fusarium to Botrytis [61] and many others [59,62,63,64,65,66]). Other mechanisms involve the recruitment of host genes or gene duplication events (e.g., fatty acid synthase as ancestor of PKS enzymes [67]). In a second step, the BGC is clustered by genomic rearrangements. Sometimes, however, it also happens that two separate BGCs, which are not physically linked, are responsible for the biosynthesis of one compound (i.e., cluster crosstalk) [36] or that superclusters (e.g., fumagillin/pseurotin cluster from Aspergillus fumigatus [35]) are formed. Cluster crosstalk could be observed with the trichothecene supercluster of F. graminearum which consists of a 12 gene BGC and a separated 2 gene BGC plus one single gene at three different genomic loci [68]. All in all, the genomic comparative studies from A. fumigatus [39], A. flavus and A. oryzae [42], S. sclerotiorum [49], V. dahlia [56], and also the reviews from Lind et al. [39] and Rokas et al. [43] give very good insights into the evolution of BGCs and especially the role of TEs as one of their driving forces. The fact that this evolutionarily driven arms-race is not only apparent between closely related species but also between different ecotypes of the same species illustrates that BGCs are evolving at a fast pace. This highlights that the research pool of fungal genera and species must be expanded to increase the chance of finding novel natural products in the future. However, most of the current research is focused on mining BGCs in only a few but very well-described genera, the so-called model organisms. In this review, we highlight the concepts and technical possibilities on how to decrypt the secondary metabolome of a given (filamentous) fungus by efficiently deploying targeted and untargeted BGC-activation methods in synergy with genome mining. Special attention will be paid to more recent strategies involving the chromatin regulation of BGCs and the new possibilities currently emerging by the combination of CRISPR/Cas technology and transcriptional activators, global regulators, or chromatin-modifying enzymes.