1. Introduction Coffee and pepper are valuable products of Vietnamese agriculture. Their coffee production worldwide ranks second, after Brazil. Black pepper is of similar importance in Vietnam, and has been exported to more than 110 countries. However, during the last years, there has been a tendency of harvest yield reduction in the case of coffee of about 20% compared to the yield of 2014. Harvest losses are caused by plant pathogens such as fungi (e.g., Fusarium oxysporum), oomycetes (Phytophthora palmivora) and root-knot nematodes (e.g., Meloidogyne incognita). In the past, chemical pesticides were used to control the phytopathogens, but their use is no longer permitted due to their toxic remnants. The epidemic occurrence of fast death disease, which is damaging black pepper plantations, has led to a rural exodus of farmers. For this reason, the sustainable development of agriculture, which includes the applying of highly efficient and reliable biocontrol agents, useful for preventing and suppressing pests on black pepper and coffee, is an urgent need. We recently isolated endospore-forming Gram-positive bacteria strains with putative biocontrol functions from healthy Vietnamese crop plants (e.g., coffee and black pepper) grown in fields infested with plant pathogens [1]. Based on their draft genome sequences, 47 isolates were assigned as being representative of the genus Bacillus belonging either to the B. subtilis or the B. cereus group [2]. Twelve additional isolates were either representatives of the Brevibacillus (11) or the Lysinibacillus (1) genus [1]. The majority of these strains could not be assigned down to species level. Preliminary experiments revealed that the Brevibacillus strains exert a strong nematicidal activity, and were able to suppress the growth of fungal plant pathogens. The genus Brevibacillus encompassing the historical Bacillus brevis cluster [3] belongs to the family Bacillaceae of the phylum Firmicutes. The genus currently comprises 30 validated species according to the List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN; [4]). The members of the genus are characterized by the formation of spherical swollen sporangia, containing L-lysine in their peptidoglycan cell wall, and by their inability to utilize traditional carbohydrates. Although reports about the biocontrol activity of Brevibacilli against plant pathogens are rare [5,6,7], the application of antimicrobial compounds with medical importance produced by Brevibacillus spp. has a long tradition. Members of the Brevibacillus brevis cluster are a rich source of antimicrobial peptides and lipopeptides (AMPs), including gramicidin A and gramicidin S. The cyclic decapeptide gramicidin S (Soviet gramicidin) was discovered as early as 1942 [8]. Linear gramicidin A is the first AMP used clinically, and has still medical importance in topical medications. Until today, many novel AMPs such as the non-ribosomally synthesized cyclic decapeptide tyrocidine, the linear lipo-tri-decapeptide brevibacillin, the atypical cationic peptide edeine, and the bacteriocins laterosporulin and laterosporulin10 have been described [8]. Brevibacillus Leaf182 has previously been characterized as the most powerful inhibitor in the Agrostemma thaliana phyllosphere, and harbors a large number of gene clusters putatively involved in the synthesis of AMPs and other antimicrobial compounds. Marthiapeptide A and the previously unknown polyketide macrobrevin were identified in Leaf182 [9]. The genus Lysinibacillus [10], with the type species Lysinibacillus boronitolerans, at present comprises 21 validly published species (24-10-2022 LPSN). L. sphaericus, formerly Bacillus sphaericus, is known as an entomopathogen able to act as a biological insecticide that is efficient against mosquitos. In addition, other beneficial abilities such as plant growth promotion, the biocontrol of plant pathogens, and bioremediation have been reported [11]. In this study, we have fully characterized a new Lysinibacillus isolate and three novel Brevibacillus strains which were isolated from Vietnamese crop plants. We could assign their genomes to novel genomospecies, and were able to identify more than 150 biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) probably involved in the synthesis of a multitude of structurally diverse antimicrobial compounds. Biocontrol experiments performed with phytopathogenic bacteria, fungi, and nematodes revealed the high potential of the Brevibacilli isolates to suppress plant pathogens.