5. Methods for Improving Fungal Strains for the Production of Secondary Metabolites Natural fungal isolates, the so-called wild-type (WT) strains, produce a limited amount of the target SM, which is insufficient for industrial production. In this regard, over the past 70–80 years, improved high-yield (HY) producers have been created, in which the yield of the target SM is increased by 100–1000 or more times. There are two principal approaches to improve the production of SMs in fungal strains: (i) an approach using genetic and metabolic engineering methods to introduce targeted changes in the resulting recombinant strains [50,251,252], and (ii) so-called classical strain improvement (CSI) based on random mutagenesis and subsequent screening of the resulting mutants with improved production of target SMs [253]. Currently, all industrial fungal producers of SMs have been obtained using CSI programs, or as a result of modifications introduced into CSI strains [253] (Figure 4). The essence of CSI programs is that a mutagenic effect is applied to the natural producer of a promising SM. Various agents are used for this, such as chemical mutagens, UV, and irradiation. A sublethal dose of mutagenic effects is selected; the obtained clones are screened according to the level of production of the target SM. Typically, most clones show similar or lower activity; however, there are clones that have higher activity than the WT strain. The most active clone is used for a new mutagenic effect (second round of mutagenesis); the obtained clones are screened, and among them, the most active one is selected. This process is repeated several dozen times, which leads to a multiple-fold increase in the production of the target SM. Along with the increase in production, concomitant mutations accumulate. Therefore, strains improved in this way usually have lower viability than WT strains. This can be expressed as a slowdown in the growth rate, a decrease in the size of the colonies on agar media, a decrease in biomass during submerged cultivation, an increase in stress resistance, and many other complications [223,254,255]. As a result, after several tens of rounds of mutagenesis, a stage begins whereby, after the next mutagenic effect, it is no longer possible to obtain more active clones. This stage corresponds to the technological limit of the method. For industrial production, a strain obtained at the last or one of the penultimate stages of mutagenesis is used (if the strain obtained at the last stage is not viable enough for biotechnological application). The most important (but not the only) event that occurs at the molecular level in CSI is the upregulation of biosynthetic genes, tens and hundreds of times [258,259]. Significant changes also occur at the level of primary metabolism; for example, they can occur at the level of the biosynthesis of precursor amino acids, in the case of NRPS [48]. Other important events in the creation of HY strains may be associated with changes in the physiological and morphological state of the cell, and its life cycle, which are necessary for high-yield fermentation. Numerous works on changing the production of SMs in fungi as a result of only direct genetic engineering manipulation of wild-type strains have not yet led to the creation of industrial producers. For example, an attempt to achieve the production of penicillin G (PenG) as a result of the heterologous expression of its BGC in Saccharomyces cerevisiae was only of theoretical significance, since after the optimization of all conditions, the maximum yield of PenG was 70–280 μg/L [260], while industrial strains improved via classical methods produce more than 50 g/L of PenG [59]. Such a powerful method as genetic engineering does not make it possible to create industrial fungal producers of SMs from natural isolates, since the transformation of a WT strain into HY requires not one or two, but a whole range of changes, including at the level of the global regulation of secondary metabolism (for more details, see Section 7.3). In this regard, a promising approach is the combination of classical and genetic engineering methods. For example, HY strains from CSI programs (such as, P. chrysogenum DS17690) after inactivation of their most active host BGCs can be used as recipient strains for the heterologous expression of target BGCs. So, in a recent work, P. chrysogenum was modified for industrial use, in which the four highly expressed biosynthetic gene clusters required to produce penicillin, roquefortine, chrysogine, and fungisporin were removed [58]. One of the few examples of a successful combination of metabolic engineering and CSI is the industrial production of pravastatin, a cholesterol-lowering drug belonging to the statin class [261]. In industry, the drug pravastatin has traditionally been produced via a semi-synthetic method. For this, compactin (Table 1) is produced in improved Penicillium citrinum strains [262], and then, converted to compactin in a one-step reaction using biocatalysts [263]. For in vivo pravastatin production, compactin BGC from P. citrinum and cytochrome P450 from Amycolatopsis orientalis (CYP105AS1, used to catalyze the final compactin hydroxylation step), fused to a redox partner, were transferred into β-lactam-negative P. chrysogenum DS50662 [261]. Numerous additional manipulations, such as the deletion of esterase activity, yielded more than 6 g/L pravastatin on a pilot production scale.