Materials and methods Strain and culture condition The A. balhimycina DSM5908 strain used in this work was a gift from Prof. Wohlleben, University of Tubingen, Germany. The strain was stored in 1-ml cryotubes at -80°C in 15% glycerol and 8 g/l tryptic soy broth (Difco, Detroit, Mich.), at a biomass dry weight of approximately 0.2 g/ml. For seed culture preparations, a 250-ml baffled Erlenmeyer flask containing 50 ml of tryptic soy broth (Difco) was inoculated with one glycerol stock vial and incubated with shaking (150 rpm) at 30°C. After 48 h of incubation, this seed culture was used for inoculation of the fermentors (5% v/v). The fermentations were performed in 1 l double-jacketed Applikon fermentors (Applikon, Shiedam, Netherlands) containing 1 l medium with an agitation rate of 500 rpm and aeration at 1 vvm (air volume/working volume/min). Dissolved O2 tension was monitored with an O2 electrode (Mettler Toledo, Greifensee, Switzerland); it did not fall below 50% saturation during any of the fermentations. The pH was kept at a value of 7.0 by addition of 1 M NaOH; temperature was maintained at 30°C. The two fermentation media, named LG and LP for low glucose and phosphate, respectively, contained the compounds in the concentration reported in Additional file 1 Table 9S. LP and LG chemostat experiments were performed in two parallel replicates, respectively, using a constant dilution rate (DR) of 0.03 h-1. It took about 3 and 5 residence times (RT, calculated as the inverse of DR) to achieve the stabilization of growth parameters (steady-state) in LG and LP cultivations which was confirmed by the constant off-gas and biomass concentration. The biomass samples used for total protein and RNA extractions were harvested during steady-state after about 6.7 and 7.9 RT from LG and LP cultivations, respectively, and immediately frozen in liquid N2 and then stored at -80°C. Analysis of biomass dry weight For biomass concentration, sampling was performed manually in triplicate from each cultivation. The optical density was measured on a UV-vis spectrophotometer UV mini 1240 from Shimadzu at 600 nm. For dry weight measurements, 3 ml samples were filtered through a pre-weight 45 mm pore size Sartorius filter and washed with 0.9% NaCl (w/w). The filters (with content) were dried 20 min at 150W in a microwave oven and weighted after cooling. Analysis of glucose and phosphorus utilization Glucose concentration in spent medium was measured by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) equipped with an AMINEX HPX-87 H column (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) working at 60 1C. 5 mM H2SO4 was used as mobile phase with a flow rate of 0.6 ml min-1. Standard UV index detection at 210 nm was used for quantification. Phosphorus concentration in spent medium was analyzed using a spectrophotometric assay kit (Inorganic phosphorus 80; Abx Diagnostics, Montpellier, France) in an automatic analyzer (Cobas Miras plus; Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Analysis of CO2 in exhaust gas The partial pressure of CO2 in the exhaust gas from the bioreactors was measured using a gas analyzer (Industrial emission monitor type 1311; Brüel & Kjaer, Denmark). Analysis of balhimycin Balhimycin titers in the cultivations were detected and quantified using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LCMS) as described elsewhere [25]. LC-DAD-ESI+-MS data were acquired on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) equipped with a diode array detector scanner. The HPLC system was connected to an Agilent MSD Ion trap operated in positive electrospray full scan mode (m/z 100-1500) with 4 scans per second. The amount of balhimycin was quantified using UV detection at 195 and 280 nm and calculated using a standard curve. Separation was done on a Phenomenex Gemini C18 110A column (2 × 100 mm2, 3 μm) with a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min at 40°C using water (pH 10.5 with 10 mM ammonium formate) and methanol solution in the following gradient: t = 0 min, 10% methanol; t = 24 min, 100% methanol; t = 30 min, 10% methanol. Protein extraction and separation for 2D-Differential Gel Electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) analysis Frozen biomass samples, collected from two parallel cultivations for each condition, were sonicated in non reducing conditions using experimental procedures as previously described [23]. After dialysis against distilled water, at 4°C, and acetone precipitation at -20°C, proteins were dissolved in the appropriate 2D-DIGE lysis buffer (30 mM Tris, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS).The four protein extracts (one for each replica per each condition) were analyzed in two technical replicates. In particular, two 40 μg protein aliquots from each extraction were minimally labelled using 320 pmol Cy3 and 320 pmol Cy5 fluorescent dyes (CyDye™DIGE minimal labelling kit, GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden), respectively, to account for florescence bias. Labelling reactions were carried out in the dark on ice for 30 min. and quenched with 0.2 mM lysine, according to manufacturer instructions. In addition, four 40 μg protein aliquots from a standard pool, generated by combining an equal amount of all the four protein extracts, were minimally labelled with 320 pmol Cy2 fluorescent dye (CyDye™DIGE, GE Healthcare) according to manufacturer instructions. To perform 2D-DIGE analysis, 40 μg of LG and LP labelled proteins were mixed, combining Cy3 and Cy5 fluorescent dyes, with the addition of 40 μg of internal standard Cy2-labelled proteins, thus generating a total of four protein mixes. For isoelectrofocusing (IEF), DeStreak rehydration solution (GE Healthcare) containing 0.5% (v/v) IPG buffer (GE Healthcare) and 1% (w/v) DTE (Sigma) was added to each mix up to 340 μl (final volume). IEF was performed as previously described [23] using 4-7 pH range 18 cm-IPG strips (GE Healthcare) in an Ettan IPGphor III apparatus (GE Healthcare). The focused proteins were then separated using 12% sodium dodecyl polyacrylamide gels (SDS-PAGE) at 10°C in a Hettan Dalt six (GE Healthcare), with a maximum setting of 40 μA and 110 V per gel. The four 2D-Gels were scanned with a DIGE imager (GE Healthcare) to detect cyanin-labeled proteins according to manufacturer's instructions. Differential gel analysis was performed automatically using Image Master 2D Platinum 7.0 DIGE software (GE Healthcare), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Protein spots were detected automatically and manually verified. Individual spot abundance was automatically calculated from the quadruplicated 2D-Gels as mean spot volume (Vol, i.e. integration of optical density over spot area) and normalized to the Cy2-labeled internal pooled standard. Protein spots showing more than 1.5 fold change in Vol, with a statistically significant ANOVA value (p < 0.05), were considered differentially abundant and identified as described in the following section by either MS analysis or by gel-matching procedures using A. balhimycina protein 2D reference-maps previously obtained [23,24]. MS analysis and protein identification Protein spots were excised from the 2D-Gels, alkylated, digested with trypsin and identified as previously reported [23]. Peptide mixtures were desalted by μZipTipC18 (Millipore, MA) using 50% (v/v) acetonitrile/5% (v/v) formic acid as eluent before MALDI-TOF-MS and/or nLC-ESI-LIT-MS/MS analysis. In the case of MALDI-TOF-MS experiments, peptide mixtures were loaded on the MALDI target, using the dried droplet technique and α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid as matrix, and analyzed using a Voyager-DE PRO mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, USA) operating in positive ion reflectron, with an acceleration voltage of 20 kV, a nitrogen laser (337 nm) and a laser repetition rate of 4 Hz [56]. The final mass spectra, measured over a mass range of 700-6000 Da and by averaging 400-800 laser shots, were elaborated using the DataExplorer 5.1 software (Applied Biosystems) and manually inspected to get the corresponding peak lists. Internal mass calibration was performed with peptides deriving from trypsin autoproteolysis. Tryptic digests were eventually analyzed by nLC-ESI-LIT-MS/MS using a LTQ XL mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source connected to an Easy-nanoLC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) [57]. Peptide mixtures were separated on an Easy C18 column (10 × 0.075 mm, 3 μm) (Proxeon). Mobile phases were 0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B), running at total flow rate of 300 nL/min. Linear gradient was initiated 20 min after sample loading; solvent B ramped from 5% to 35% over 45 min, from 35% to 60% over 10 min, and from 60% to 95% over 20 min. Spectra were acquired in the range m/z 400-2000. Acquisition was controlled by a data-dependent product ion scanning procedure over the three most abundant ions, enabling dynamic exclusion (repeat count 2 and exclusion duration 60 s); the mass isolation window and collision energy were set to m/z 3 and 35%, respectively. MASCOT search engine version 2.2.06 (Matrix Science, UK) was used to identify protein spots unambiguously from an updated NCBI nonredundant database also containing the A. balhimycina ORF product database based on A. balhimycina DSM5908 genome sequencing [23] by using MALDI-TOF-MS data, a mass tolerance value of 40-80 ppm, trypsin as proteolytic enzyme, a missed cleavages maximum value of 2 and Cys carbamidomethylation and Met oxidation as fixed and variable modification, respectively. Candidates with a MASCOT score > 83 (corresponding to p < 0.05 for a significant identification) were further evaluated by the comparison with their calculated mass and pI values, using the experimental values obtained from 2-DE. Raw data files from nLC-ESI-LIT-MS/MS experiments were searched with SEQUEST (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) within the Proteome Discoverer software package (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA, version 1.0 SP1) against the NCBI nonredundant database implemented by the preliminary version of the A. balhimycina DSM5908 ORF product database mentioned above [23]. Database searching was performed by selecting Cys carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and Met oxidation as variable modification. Searches were carried out by using a mass tolerance value of 2.0 Da for precursor ion and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragments, trypsin as proteolytic enzyme, a missed cleavages maximum value of 2. Other SEQUEST parameters were kept as default. Candidates with more than 2 assigned peptides with an individual SEQUEST score versus charge state > 1.5 for charged state (CS) 1, > 2.0 for CS 2, > 2.4 for CS 3, > 3.3 for CS 4, > 4.2 for CS 5, > 4.5 for CS 6 were considered confidently identified. Definitive peptide assignment was always associated to manual spectral visualization and verification. The sequence of the identified proteins and homology analysis, performed using on-line available versions of BLAST search against UniProt Knowledgebase http://www.expasy.ch/tools/blast, are reported in Additional file 1 Table 3S and 4S. Protein identification by gel-matching was automatically performed using A. balhimycina protein 2D reference-maps [23], available over the World Wide Web as interactive pages at http://www.unipa.it/ampuglia/Abal-proteome-maps[24], and Image Master 2D platinum 7.0 software. More than 50 highly reproducible protein spots were used as landmarks to perform automatic gel-matching that was then verified by an accurate visual inspection using 3 D view tool. Total RNA isolation, RT-PCR and qRT-PCR analysis Gene expression analysis at the transcriptional level of selected Pho regulon and bal genes was performed according to Gallo et al. 2010 [23]. The mycelia were resuspended in 1 ml P-buffer [58] containing lysozyme (1 mg/ml) and RNase inhibitor RNaseOUT (Invitrogen) (40 U/ml), and then incubated for 10 min, at 37°C. The RNA was extracted by using the RNeasy midi kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. DNase I (Roche) treatment was performed at 37°C, for 1 h, and ethanol precipitation in the presence of 0.1 vol of 3 M sodium acetate allowed recovery of the DNase-treated total RNA. After a washing step with 70% (v/v) ethanol and air drying, the RNA pellet was resuspended in water with RNase inhibitor RNaseOUT (200 U/ml). As control of RNA quality, a RT-PCR with 0.1 μg of total RNA and primer pairs internal to hrdB was carried out using the Superscript One-Step RT-PCR kit (Invitrogen) and the conditions indicated by the supplier. PCRs were performed on 0.5 μg of RNA samples using 40 cycles prior to exclude the presence of genomic DNA. Primer pairs amplifying intragenic regions of the genes analysed by qRT-PCR are listed in Table 10S (Additional file 1). The identity of RT-PCR products was confirmed by sequencing. The high-capacity cDNA archive kit (Applied Biosystems) was used to retrotranscribe 2 μg of total RNA, extracted from LP and LG cultures, in a 100 μl of water (final volume). Gene expression was analyzed quantitatively by using Applied Biosystems 7300 real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems). The expression of hrdB[23] was used as an internal control to quantify the relative expression of target genes. 2 μl of cDNAs were mixed with 12.5 μl of SYBR green PCR master mix (Applied Biosystem) and 10 pmol of each primer in a final volume of 25 μl. The PCR was performed under the following conditions: 2 min at 50°C and 10 min at 95°C, followed by 40 cycles of 15 s at 95°C and 1 min at 60°C. A dissociation reaction was eventually performed using a temperature gradient from 55 to 99°C by increasing 1°C/min. This procedure permitted recording the melting curve of the PCR products and, consequently, their specificity to be determined. A negative control (distilled water) was included in all real-time PCR assays, and each experiment was performed in triplicate or quadruplicate. Search for putative PHO box sequences A. balhimycina PHO box sequences were searched by matching two directs repeats (gttcacccggc and gttcatttacg) of S. coelicolor PHO box in the upstream region of pstS gene with regions extending 300 bp upstream of the putative translation start sites of differentially expressed A. balhimycina genes. To this aim, on-line available versions of ClustalW http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw2/index.html[59] and EMBOSS GUI matcher http://bips.u-strasbg.fr/EMBOSS/[60] and BLAST bl2seq http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi[61] software were used. Only outputs derived from all the three approaches were accepted (Additional file 1 Table 6S and 7S). Preparation of labeled DNA fragments DNA fragments containing the upstream regions of S. coelicolor pstS (PpstS: tccacaggggttcacccggcgttcatttacgcccttcggc) and the A. balhimycina pstS (PpstS: gaaaggcttgttcactttgcgttcatctggacaggggaac) and ppk (Pppk: ggtatcgcgttgagctgttcatctgaccttcaccacgg) were prepared by incubation of the corresponding oligonucleotides at 90°C for 10 min, followed by slow cooling to room temperature. The annealed products were recovered from nondenaturing 20% polyacrylamide gels by the crush-soak method [62] and labeled with T4 polynucleotide kinase (Invitrogen) according to the supplier's protocol. Preparation of A. balhimycina crude extract A. balhimycina pellet was washed twice with crack buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.3 mM DTT), resuspended in 5 ml of crack buffer, and disrupted by sonication. The cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 13,000 × g (20 min, 4°C), and the supernatant was stored at −80°C. Gel mobility shift assay The gel mobility shift assay was performed according to Alduina et al., (2007) [14]. For the binding assay, A. balhimycina crude extract was dialyzed against distilled water over night at 4°C and, then, approximately 200 μg of proteins were incubated in 20 μl of 12.5 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10% glycerol, 62.5 mM KCl, 0.75 mM DTT, and 5 mM MgCl2, containing 100 μg of poly(dI-dC)-poly(dI-dC) ml-1, for 10 min, at 4°C. After 15 min of incubation with 0.4 ng of 32P-labeled DNA, complexes and free DNA were resolved on non-denaturing 5% polyacrylamide gels run in 0.5× Tris-borate-EDTA buffer at 150 V for approximately 2 h [54] and then equilibrated in 10% acetic acid, dried, and subjected to autoradiography. For testing the specificity of binding, either unlabeled probe or a competitor DNA fragment containing the upstream region of Nonomuraea sp ATCC 39727 dbv14 [14] were added before incubation of the proteins and probe.