Materials and Methods Materials Nickel sulphate heptahydrate (NiSO4·7H2O), 25% ammonia (NH3), zinc nitrate [Zn(NO3)2·6H2O] ionophore (12-crown-4), sodium tetra phenyl borate (NaTPB), di-n-butyl-phthalate (DBP), tetrahydrofuran (THF) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich Sweden (Stockholm, Sweden). All other chemicals used were of analytical grade. Fabrication of NiO Honey Comb Nanostructures The honeycomb-like NiO nanostructures were fabricated on nickel foam substrates using NiSO4·7H2O and NH3 as primary chemical reactants. The nickel foam substrates were sonicated in an ultrasonic bath for 15 minutes using an ethanol solution. Then, the nickel foam substrates were cleaned with deionized water and dried in air. Afterwards the substrates were affixed in a Teflon sample holder and vertically dipped into a mixture of 0.1 M NiSO4·7H2O and 0.1 M NH3 solutions prepared in deionized water. The sample solutions were kept in an oven at 90 °C for 7 hours. The role of NH3 in growth process is to act as a complexing reagent for nickel. When the growth time was completed then the substrates were taken out from the oven and a visible greenish colour type film was visible on the nickel foam, then the sample substrates were washed with deionized water and dried in an oven at 80 °C for 3 hours. After drying, some of the as-prepared nickel foam substrates were annealed in air at 500 °C in order to achieve NiO honeycomb nanostructures. Functionalization of NiO Honey Comb Nanostructures with a Selective Zinc Ion Ionophore (12-Crown-4 Ether) The functionalization of the honeycomb-like NiO nanostructures with a selective zinc ion ionophore was performed as followed: the ingredients and amounts of each for the preparation of the membrane composition were as follows: 12-crown-4 (40 mg), NaTPB (40 mg), PVC (125 mg), and DBP (100 mg) in tetrahydrofuran (12 mL) [32]. Afterwards the NiO electrodes were dipped into membrane solution for 5 minutes using the direct adsorption method and dried at room temperature for 1 hour then the functionalized electrode were kept in a refrigerator overnight at 4 °C. Potentiometric Measurements The potential measurements were carried out for the range of 0.0005 mM to 100 mM of zinc nitrate concentrations prepared in 1 mM phosphate buffer solution of pH 7.3 at room temperature. The functionalised NiO honeycomb-like nanostructures were used as working electrode and silver-silver chloride (Ag/AgCl as reference electrode. A model 744 pH-meter (Metrohm, Switzerland) was used for the potential measurements and a Keithley 2400 (Tektronix, Beaverton, OR, USA) source meter was used for the response time measurements.