Methods Cultivation and germination Details regarding the cultivation and growth of S. coelicolor M145 spores were published in our previous work [20, 21, 33]. Briefly, sporulation proceeded 14 days at 28°C on solid agar plates (0.4% (w/v) yeast extract, 1% (w/v) malt extract, 0.4% (w/v) glucose, 2.5% (w/v) bacterial agar, pH 7.2) overlaid with cellophane discs. The harvested spores (sample t1 taken after growth for 14 d) were first activated by mechanical disruption of the outer coat in water and then washed, and a 10 min heat shock treatment (50°C in AM medium, sample t2 taken) was applied to boost synchrony. Spores were then germinated in liquid AM medium (20 amino acids at 0.2 mM, 20 mM KH2PO4, 30 mM Na2HPO4, 2% (w/v) glucose, 0.05% (w/v) MgCl2, 0.5 mM CaCl2, 7 mM KCl, and a mixture of bases, each 0.01% (w/v)) at 37°C (samples t3 – t13 taken every 30 min). mRNA samples were collected from dormant (t1) and heat-activated (t2) spores and then at 30-min intervals throughout the germination time-course until 5.5 h (t13) of growth. Altogether, we obtained samples at 13 time points, including samples from dormant spores, with at least three biological and technical replicates for each time point. RNA isolation from spores To disrupt the cells, we used a FastPrep-24 machine (Biomedicals), wherein the spores were mechanically shaken in tubes containing zirconium sand, two 4-mm glass beads, 500 μl of lysis buffer [44] (50 mM Tris–HCl pH8, 500 mM LiCl, 50 mM EDTA pH 8, and 5% (w/v) SDS) and 8 μl of RNase inhibitors (Bio-Rad). The samples were centrifuged at 14000 g for 15 min at 4°C, and phenol-chloroform RNA extractions were performed twice on the supernatant. The RNA was precipitated overnight in ethanol and 0.3 M sodium acetate at −20°C. Finally, the RNA was re-suspended in 50 μl RNase-free water and 0.5 μl RNase inhibitors, and the remaining DNA was removed using a DNase kit (Ambion). The RNA was stored in water at −20°C. DNA microarrays and data processing Data were processed as in our previous paper [21]. The data preprocessing steps are repeated here to make clear how the values used for the analysis in this article were obtained. RNA quality control and gene expression levels were performed by Oxford Gene Technology (Oxford, UK) using Agilent DNA microarrays covering the entire S. coelicolor genome and the standard Bacterial RNA amplification protocol for two-channel assays by OGT. The data were normalized using LOWESS and filtered for background and flag information (from Agilent documentation) in the GeneSpring software to obtain genes that were expressed significantly above background and to avoid side effects of possible cross hybridization. These methods reduced the number of entities on a single array from 43888 to 25312, which finally represented the outcome for 7115 genes out of 7825. The data discussed in this publication have been deposited in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus [45] and are accessible using the GEO Series accession number GSE44415 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE44415). Array normalization The experiment included 37 arrays from 13 distinct time points during S. coelicolor germination. The arrays shared a common reference in the red channel (Cy5), which consisted of a mixture of RNA samples from all examined time points. The distributions of Log2Ratio values (Log2Ratio = log2 (Sample (Cy3)/Reference (Cy5))) for all samples were scattered around a common mean and all had similar variance. Therefore, the distributions for each array were centered so that the medians and the median absolute deviations of all the array distributions were equal. To eliminate array outliers, we filtered out the 0.02 quantile of the least and the most intensive Log2Ratio values. Normalized Log2Ratios were exponentiated to return the values to the original scale further refered as the Normalized Ratios. The outliers among gene replicates at individual time points were filtered using the Q-test (for 3–9 inputs) and the Pierce test (for > 10 inputs). Expression profile analysis Highly expressed genes To eliminate profiles with low overall expression during germination, we analyzed microarray sample channel signals (Cy3 labeling). The idea was to minimize the influence of gene profiles whose microarray signal originated from experimental errors that exceeded the pure technical limits for eliminating signals under the background. Thus, the overall expression level for each gene was specified by computing the median across all microarray replicates at all time points for the sample channel microarray signal. Profiles whose overall expression level was below the first quartile value (563) of all counted medians were filtered out. To avoid omitting profiles with a low overall expression level but with a significant peak, the filtered expression profiles were manually inspected; in the presence of a significant peak, the profile was considered to be highly expressed and added to the set. The final set of “highly expressed” genes contained 5385 gene expression profiles and was used for further analyses. Differential expression analysis Each gene in the “highly expressed” set was represented at each time point by a set of Normalized Ratios corresponding to the array and sample repeats. At each time point, the Normalized Ratios for a single gene were distributed around a mean with a variance given by the experimental and biological error. The mean of the Normalized Ratios at a given time point will be mentioned as the “gene expression level” of the given gene at the given time point t (mRNAitj, i = 1..5385, j = 1..13). A series of expression levels at all 13 time points will be further mentioned as the “expression profile”. The differential expression of gene i between two consecutive time points, tj, tj+1, was then calculated as the ratio of the expression levels of the given gene at the two consecutive time points (mRNAitj+1/mRNAitj) for all 13 time points (j = 1..12), resulting in a “differential expression profile”. The significance of the difference between the expression levels at tj, tj + 1 was tested by a standard t-test for equality of means. At each interval (tj, tj+1), genes with significant differences in their levels (p < 0.05) and with an activation/deactivation ratio >2 were selected (the 2-fold change level was arbitrarily chosen to exclude significant but biologically irrelevant changes in expression levels). All genes with significant change in expression and greater than 2-fold level at at least one interval during germination were identified in the KEGG database (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) [22] and mapped to pathways. The same procedure (without KEGG mapping) was also carried out for 45 annotated sigma factors. Temporal changes in the differential expression profiles were analyzed, and the results were summarized.