Materials and Methods Genomic DNA Preparation The DW2 strain used in this study was provided by China Center for Type Culture Collection (CCTCC), whose number was CCTCC M2011344. B. licheniformis DW2 was grown on Luria Bertani (LB) agar plates or in LB broth at 37°C, supplemented with antibiotics (tetracycline, 20 mg/mL; ampicillin, 50 mg/mL; kanamycin, 20 mg/mL) when necessary. The seed culture (1 mL) was inoculated into a 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask containing 20 mL bacitracin fermentation medium [6% soybean meal, 4.5% starch, 0.1% (NH4)2SO4, 0.6% CaCO3, pH 6.5∼7.0], followed by 40 h incubation on a rotary shaker (180 rpm) at 37°C. Genomic DNA was extracted using a standard SDS-Phenol procedure (Sambrook et al., 1982) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, combined with phenol-chloroform extraction and RNase A treatment. PacBio SMRT Sequencing We determined the complete genome sequence of B. licheniformis DW2 using PacBio single molecule real-time (SMRT) technology. We prepared a 3 to 20 kb genomic DNA library suitable for P6/C4 chemistry. Using two SMRT cell on PacBio RSII sequencing platform, 116,486 polymerase reads with mean read length of 4,268 bp were obtained. The polymerase reads were assembled de novo with Hierarchical Genome Assembly Process 3 (HGAP3) within the SMRT Analysis version 2.3.0 software (Chin et al., 2013). Subsequently, the best assembly was selected, and Minimus 2 was used for trimming the circular contig (Sommer et al., 2007). The replication origin was determined by aligning the DW2 genomic sequence with B. licheniformis DSM13. For identification of methylated bases and modification motifs, the “RS_Modification_and_Motif_Analysis.1” protocol in SMRT Portal under default parameter settings was used, with the assembled genome. Putative restriction modification systems have been identified using the Restriction-ModificationFinder-1.0 server1 based on the Restriction Enzyme database (REBASE) (Roberts et al., 2015). The Annotation of B. licheniformis DW2 Genome After the complete sequence was obtained, the genome was annotated using the rapid annotation tool RAST (Ogata et al., 1999; Aziz et al., 2008). In addition, the unigenes were annotated by the public protein databases of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (Galperin et al., 2015), Cluster of Orthologous Groups of Proteins (COG) (Gene Ontology Consortium, 2015), Swiss-Prot protein2, NCBI non-redundant (NR3), and Gene Ontology (GO) (Lagesen et al., 2007) using BLASTP to get corresponding functional annotation information. As each sequence had many alignments, we retain the optimal comparison results as the annotation of the gene to ensure its accuracy. The predictions of rRNA and tRNA were performed using RNAmmer (Lowe and Eddy, 1997) and tRNAscan-SE (Zhang et al., 2000), respectively. Insertion sequence (IS) elements were predicted with IS Finder (Benson, 1999). Whole-Genome Alignment and Identification of Operon Structures We constructed and visualized the multiple genome alignment of four complete genomes of B. licheniformis strains DW2, ATCC14580, 9945A and WX-02 using Mauve v2.4.0 (Darling et al., 2010). Pairwise collinear comparisons of the four genome sequences were performed using Mummer3 (Kurtz et al., 2004). Operon of B. licheniformis DW2 was identified using DOOR 2.0 algorithm for prokaryotic operon analysis (Mao et al., 2014). RNA Isolation and Library Preparation for ssRNA-seq RNA samples were isolated at three time points for two bacterial samples (wild strain and ΔAbrB strain): 14 h (logarithmic growth phase), 22 h (transitional phase) and 25 h (stationary phase). Cells were collected by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 5 min, and then transferred to a 10-ml centrifuge tube after grinding in liquid nitrogen. Cells were then lysed in 1 mL of TRIzol for 30–60 s. To the lysate, 200 μL of chloroform was added, and the sample was then mixed by inversion and incubated at room temperature for 15 min. The sample was then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C, and supernatant was precipitated with an equal volume of isopropanol at room temperature for 10 min. After centrifugation, the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was air dried and dissolved in 20–40 μL of RNase-free water. Total RNA was treated with RNase-free DNase I for 30 min at 37°C to remove genomic DNA. RNA concentration was measured using Qubit® RNA Assay Kit in Qubit® 2.0 Fluorometer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, United States). At the same time, RNA integrity was assessed using the RNA Nano 6000 Assay Kit of the Bioanalyzer 2100 system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States). Each sample had three replicates, and all biological replicates were processed in separate batches from each other. Libraries for ssRNA sequencing (Novogene Experimental Department) were constructed at three time points (14, 22, and 25 h). A total amount of 3 μg RNA per sample was used as input material for the RNA sample preparations. Sequencing libraries were generated using NEBNext® UltraTM Directional RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina® (NEB, United States) following manufacturer’s recommendation and index codes were added to attribute sequences to each sample. Briefly, (epicentre Ribo-ZeroTM) fragmentation was carried out using divalent cations under elevated temperature in NEBNext First Strand Synthesis Reaction Buffer (5X). First strand cDNA was synthesized using random hexamer primer and M-MuLV Reverse Transcriptase (RNaseH-). Second strand cDNA synthesis was subsequently performed using DNA Polymerase I and RNase H. In the reaction buffer, dNTPs with dTTP were replaced by dUTP. Remaining overhangs were converted into blunt ends via exonuclease/polymerase activities. After adenylation of 3′ ends of DNA fragments, NEBNext Adaptor with hairpin loop structure were ligated to prepare for hybridization. In order to select cDNA fragments of preferentially 150∼200 bp in length, the library fragments were purified with AMPure XP system (Beckman Coulter, Beverly, MA, United States). Then 3 μl USER Enzyme (NEB, United States) was used with size-selected, adaptor-ligated cDNA at 37°C for 15 min followed by 5 min at 95°C before PCR. Then PCR was performed with Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase, Universal PCR primers and Index (X) Primer. At last, products were purified (AMPure XP system) and library quality was assessed on the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system. Mapping Reads to B. licheniformis DW2 Genome and Analyzing Differentially Expressed Genes All the raw reads were initially processed to obtain clean reads by the following steps: (1) reads with adaptor were discarded; (2) reads with ambiguous bases (undetermined bases, N) larger than 10% were removed; (3) low-quality reads that contained more than 50% Q-value < 5 bases were discarded. After filtering, all clean reads were aligned to the assembled genome using Bowtie2 (Langmead and Salzberg, 2012), and reads with ambiguous alignments or more than three mismatches were discarded. Only uniquely mapped reads were used for further analysis. The per-base–format coverage depth and read counts were calculated using BEDTools (Quinlan and Hall, 2010). Because different samples may have different total read counts, sequencing depth, and biases, the normalized transcription level of genes was expressed in reads per kilobase of ORF per million mapped reads (RPKM) (Mortazavi et al., 2008). The transcriptome raw reads have been deposited in NCBI Sequence Read Archive database under accession number SRP045205. In addition, we generated a distance matrix for expression data based on RPKM values by using Pearson correlation as dissimilarity metric (El-Sharnouby et al., 2013). Clustering was performed and deprograms were generated using the cluster package in R. Differentially expressed genes between wild strain and ΔAbrB strain were identified using the DESeq R package with the MARS (MA-plot-based method with Random Sampling) model (Anders and Huber, 2010). The DEGs were screened with the false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of ≤0.01 and an absolute value of fold change (FC) ≥2.