Materials and Methods Strains, media and general DNA manipulations The generation of deletion-, complementation- and tagged strains was carried out in the ΔakuA-strain AfS35 a derivative of WT-strain D141, which provides high levels of homologous recombination [30,72,73]. BiFC was done in pyrG1-strain Af293.1 (FGSC#1137), obtained from the Fungal Genetics Stock Center [32,74]. A. fumigatus strains were cultivated in minimal media (MM) with appropriate supplements. For cloning techniques E. coli strains DH5α and MACH-1 (Invitrogen) were applied. Fungal and bacterial transformations were carried out as described [34,75]. Plasmids and A. fumigatus strains are given in Tables S4/S6 and S1 Text. Real-time-PCR Total RNAs were extracted with “RNeasy plant mini kit” (Qiagen). 0.8 μg RNA was transcribed into cDNA using “QuantiTect reverse transcription kit” (Qiagen). Gene expressions were measured with quantitative real-time PCR using either a Light Cycler 2.0 System (Roche) with “RealMasterMix SYBR ROX 2.5x” (5Prime) or a CFX Connect Real-Time System (Bio-Rad) with “MESA GREEN qPCR MasterMix Plus for SYBR Assay” (Eurogentec). Histone (h2A) and Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gpdA) expression were used as reference for relative quantification. Details about used cDNA concentrations and primer pairs are given in S5 Table and S1 Text. Immunoblotting For Immunoblotting experiments 100–150 μg crude protein extract was separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane by electro blotting as described previously [36,76]. Antibodies used for detection of fusion proteins are described in S1 Text. Signals were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence technique with either an Amersham Hyperfilm-P (GE Healthcare Limited) or with the Fusion SL7 system (Peqlab). For signal quantification Bio 1D imaging software (Peqlab) was used. Protein stability was measured by the addition of 25 μg/ml cycloheximide prior to protein extraction. Tandem affinity purification (TAP) Co-purification with TAP-tagged Fbx15, Fbx15(P12S), SconB and SconB(P200S) was performed with a modified version of the Tandem Affinity Purification protocol as described in S1 Text. GFP-/ RFP-trap Immunoprecipitation of GFP- or RFP-tagged proteins were performed with “GFP-trap_A and “RFP-trap_A (chromotek). Proteins were extracted from 5 ml frozen pulverized mycelium. 5 ml of protein crude extracts were incubated with 40 μl of GFP-Trap_A or RFP-Trap_A agarose, which was previously equilibrated to the B300-buffer. After two hours of incubation agarose was washed twice with B300 buffer. The agarose was boiled in 100 μl 3x SDS-sample buffer to elute the bound proteins. The extracted proteins were used directly for SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblotting or coomassie-staining and tryptic digestion for LC-MS/MS analysis. TMT-labeling Fbx15-GFP was purified from cultures before and after treatment with 3 mM H2O2 and run on an SDS-PAGE. After coomassie-staining the proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin. The purified peptides were labeled with an isobaric mass tag using the “TMTduplex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit” (Thermo Scientific), where Fbx15-GFP before H2O2 treatment was labeled with heavy TMT-127 and all time points after H2O2 induction were labeled with TMT-126 (for details see S1 Text). LC-MS/MS Protein Identification Proteins were digested with “Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin” (Promega). Digested peptides were extracted from polyacrylamide gel and separated using reversed-phase liquid chromatography with an RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Scientific) followed by mass identification with a Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Details about mass spectrometry and data analysis are given in S1 Text. Murine virulence tests The virulence of A. fumigatus Δfbx mutants and the corresponding complemented strains was tested in an established murine model for IPA [37,38,77]. In brief, female CD-1 mice were immunosuppressed with cortisone acetate (25 mg/mouse intraperitoneally; Sigma-Aldrich) on days -3 and 0. Mice were anesthetized and intranasally infected with 20 μl of a fresh suspension containing 106 conidia. A control group was mock infected with PBS to monitor the influence of the immunosuppression. The health status was monitored at least twice daily for 14 days and moribund animals (defined by severe dyspnoea and/or severe lethargy) were sacrificed. Infections were performed with a group of 10 mice for each tested strain. Lungs from euthanized animals were removed, and fixed in formalin and paraffin-embedded for histopathological analyses according to standard protocols [39,78]. Ethics statement Mice were cared for in accordance with the principles outlined by the European Convention for the Protection of Vertebrate Animals Used for Experimental and Other Scientific Purposes (European Treaty Series, no. 123; http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/123). All animal experiments were in compliance with the German animal protection law and were approved by the responsible Federal State authority “Thüringer Landesamt für Verbraucherschutz” and ethics committee “Beratende Komission nach § 15 Abs. 1 Tierschutzgesetz” with the permit Reg.-Nr. 03-001/12.