Methods and Their Perspective We introduce here general bioinformatics methods for identification of unique fungal pathways that allow us to screen efficiently for safe new drug targets and design new antimycotics. We describe several different bioinformatics pipelines, by which we can find numerous new fungal targeting strategies. In general, one should consider the biology of the fungal species, compare virulence and pathogenesis to spot interesting fungal-specific differences. For this, an evolutionary perspective is important, too. For instance, A. fumigatus is a versatile survivor, usually with a saprophytic life style and only causes disease, if there is an immunocompromised person infected. Thus, the only real ‘weapon’ it uses are toxins such as gliotoxin, developed against amoeba—its natural enemy that exists in its usual ecosystem. The adequate strategy to cope with the fungal infection is to take a closer look at metabolic pathways, enzymes involved in the synthesis and maintenance of the cell wall and regulation. The utilization of bioinformatics methods can produce data useful for the design of new drugs. Another important process that we have to consider is the virulence and the selection for the virulence factors, which are usually not present in the fungi. Pathogenic fungi such as Aspergillus can inhabit disparate niches and their ‘virulence’ occurs when a combination of host and fungus takes place. This happens when there are factors favoring high adaptability in low nutrient conditions. For instance, pathways supporting Aspergillus during iron deficiency help the fungus also to prosper in the lungs of immunocompromised patients (A. fumigatus) as well as to reach new human niches (C. albicans). Similar considerations apply for Candida auris [187]. In this paper, we started from the well-known and established standard methods to identify fungal unique pathways—such as genome annotation, biochemical databases, and domain analysis—to identify fungal-specific adaptations that can be targeted. The reader learns a couple of pipelines and can be assured that many bioinformatics laboratories use such and similar methods to identify drug targets in fungi or bacteria. Here, we tried to give instructive examples and useful methods to clarify different approaches how novel targets can be identified by bioinformatics. Another hot topic of fungal target identification by bioinformatics is network biology. Network biology approaches can be established by several different methods and databanks, which combine the data of various omics studies. This comparison of host and pathogen interaction networks is called ‘interactomics’. We provide from this several example of successful identification of novel host–fungal interactions that open new alleys and drug options to treat fungal infections. The network-based approach has very good theoretical foundations, is reliable and confidential. However, as detailed in the corresponding chapter, the success depends on the reliability of the interaction data. Since databases contain a number of such data, the extrapolation to a new organism and fungus (e.g., A. fumigatus) is inherently risky if not supported by experimental analysis and, at the very least, additional bioinformatics analysis of the postulated interaction. A particularly good strategy is to combine such predictions with metabolic modeling. If such predictions can be refined and combined with in vivo testing and experimental follow-up, the success rate is high. The European Union sponsored project “AspMetNet” based on the initiative EraNet successfully utilizes the bioinformatics prediction combined with metabolic and signaling modeling as well as experimental verification to better cope with infectious disease, mainly focused on the species A. fumigatus. Thus, the genome-wide analysis of protein interaction networks is certainly an exciting new perspective that was not possible before and, which allows unprecedented general and thorough screening of all fungal pathways for new antimycotic targets. To put such new bioinformatics approaches into perspective, we also introduce a fresh look at toxins as antifungal targets. Interestingly, first of all, fungal toxins—such as gliotoxin—traditionally are regarded only as products of the fungus. However, as mentioned above, there is a clear potential to use such toxins as the basis for novel antifungals thanks/due to their lethal effect when are accumulated in the fungal cells. Secondly, after a theoretical analysis, we concluded that not only such toxins, but even toxic intermediates, in general, pose a substantial risk for any microorganism and fungi, in particular. Herein, we give concrete examples including the ergosterol pathway that by suitable manipulation (in the manner of the drug blocking the subsequent enzyme or drug enhancing the toxic intermediate producing enzyme) is new space for novel antimycotics against which it is difficult to develop resistance. Beyond the typical techniques cited, there is of course ongoing research, too. In such studies, experimental validation is critical, for instance Fungal sterol C22-desaturase did not turn out as an antimycotic target after extensive experimental testing [141]. Moreover, one should keep on mining natural substances. Thus it was recently shown that crotalicidin from rattlesnake displays antifungal activity against clinical and standard strains of Candida [188]. Finally, in the last chapter, we sketch the path for the next step, the design of novel drugs which can bind to or inhibit identified targets. We describe several approaches, such as fragment-based drug discovery, or “good old strong work horses” such as docking and molecular dynamics including different in silico virtual screens that can target, identify and analyze the drug candidates. We are convinced that, beside the approaches mentioned in this paper, the space for novel strategies against antimycotics is far bigger than one would think as a non-expert and we hope we can stimulate research in this direction.