Material and Methods Bacterial strains, culture conditions and strain manipulation Bacterial strains are listed in Supplementary Table S3. Escherichia coli strains were manipulated using standard laboratory procedures35,36. When needed, the following compounds were added to E. coli cultures at the following concentrations: ampicillin, 100 mg/l; apramycin, 50 (liquid media) or 75 (solid media) mg/l; chloramphenicol, 30 mg/l; kanamycin, 25 mg/l; hygromycin, 50 (liquid media) or 100 (solid media) mg/l; spectinomycin, 100 mg/l; isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG), 1 mM. S. cinnamoneus was manipulated using standard laboratory procedures37. Spores were prepared on Gruau medium (wheat groats, 30 g/l; glucose, 5 g/l; yeast extract, 5 g/l; pH adjusted to 7.2 with NaOH; agar, 20 g/l) (Mellouli, personal communication). Conjugations between E. coli ET12567pUZ8002 and S. cinnamoneus were carried out by the modified Kieser et al. protocol37, using MS medium complemented with 10 mM MgCl2 and a 3 ml antibiotic overlay of SNA medium containing fosfomycin instead of nalidixic acid. Exconjugants were patched on MS containing the selective antibiotic(s), fosfomycin and ampicillin. Antibiotic concentrations used for Streptomyces were as follow: ampicillin, 30 mg/l; apramycin, 30 mg/l; fosfomycin, 50 mg/l; kanamycin, 25 mg/l; hygromycin, 50 mg/l. Plasmids and DNA manipulations All plasmids used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table S4. PCR reactions for cloning applications were carried out using Phusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or Q5 (New England Biolabs) high fidelity polymerases according to manufacturers’ protocol for GC-rich DNA, reaction mixtures being supplemented with 1 M of betaine. PCR reactions for the control of constructions and during RT-PCR were carried out using the DreamTaq DNA Polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 1x Q Solution (Qiagen). All primers are listed in Supplementary Table S5. Primers were provided either by Integrated DNA Technologies or Eurofins. PCR products were purified using the NucleoSpin Gel and PCR Clean-up kit (Macherey-Nagel). Plasmid isolation from E. coli was performed using the NucleoSpin Plasmid kit (Macherey-Nagel). Restriction enzymes and DNA-modifying enzymes were supplied by Thermo Fisher Scientific. Vector DNA was systematically dephosphorylated before ligation. Digestion products were isolated on agarose gels and purified with the NucleoSpin Gel and PCR Clean-up kit (Macherey-Nagel). Ligations were performed using T4 DNA Ligase (either Thermo Fisher Scientific or Promega). Chemocompetent E. coli DH5α cells were used for transformation by ligation products or plasmids unless stated otherwise. Streptomyces genomic DNA was extracted as previously described15, with the exception of DNA used for genome sequencing. DNA isolation for the sequencing of the S. cinnamoneus ATCC 21532 genome was carried out as previously described38. The sequence obtained for the bcm gene cluster and its flanking regions were identical to those already deposited in DDBJ/ENA/GenBank11,13. Bioinformatic analyses In silico analyses of sequences and primer design were made using the Clone Manager 9 Professional Edition Software (Scientific & Educational Software). Other analyses were performed using BLAST, run locally, or on the NCBI web server and AntiSMASH 239. Multiple sequence alignments were done with Multalin40. Deletion of the whole bcm cluster The entire bicyclomycin biosynthetic gene cluster was replaced in a double homologous recombination event with a kanamycin resistance cassette. Details of the procedure are given in Supplementary Information. Plasmid construction Briefly, for the in vivo characterization of the bicyclomycin BGC, the bcmA gene with its native promoter and the whole bicyclomycin BGC were cloned into a pRT801 derivative, yielding respectively pJWe20 and pJWe14 vectors. The plasmid pJWe14 was used to generate derivatives with individual in-frame deletions for each of the bcm genes, yielding plasmids pMC2, pMC4, pMC6, pMC8, pMC12, pMC14 and pMC16 where the bcmB, bcmC, bcmD, bcmE, bcmF, bcmG, bcmA or bcmH gene were deleted, respectively. For the bcmH mutant complementation, the bcmH gene was cloned with its native promoter into pOSV806 vector yielding pJWe21. The plasmids obtained were transferred to appropriate S. cinnamoneus strains by conjugation. For the in vitro characterization of decoration enzymes, genes bcmB-G were individually cloned into the pET15b E. coli expression vector. The recombinant proteins had an N-terminal 6xHis tag. Details of cloning procedure are provided in Supplementary Information. Constructions were verified by sequencing (Genewiz). Chemical synthesis of cIL Briefly, 1 g (5.5 mmoles) of H-l-Ile-OMe.HCl (Novabiochem) was dissolved in 15 ml of dimethylformamide at room temperature and 935 µl (5.5 mmoles) of diisopropylamine were added. After freezing at 4 °C, 1.37 g (5.5 mmole) of N-Boc-l-Leu-OH were added, followed by 1.13 g (5.5 mmole) of dicyclohexylcarbodiimide. After incubation for 1 h at 4 °C, the reaction mixture was incubated overnight at room temperature, and the rest of the process was performed according to41. 528 mg of final product (2.32 mmoles, yield 42%) was obtained, dissolved in DMSO and shown to be homogeneous by HPLC analysis using a dC18 column (Atlantis, dC18, 150 × 4.6 mm, 3 µm). The chemical structure of cIL was validated by NMR (Supplementary Information and Supplementary Figs. S9–S10). In vitro characterization of tailoring enzymes For the in vitro characterization of tailoring enzymes, His-tagged proteins BcmB to G were produced in the E. coli BL21-AI strain and purified by nickel affinity chromatography. Enzymatic assays were performed at 30 °C in 1 ml reaction volume in the presence of 1 µM purified protein, 200 µM of diketopiperazine substrate and the necessary cofactors and co-substrates. The reaction mixtures were analysed by HPLC and ESI-MS. Reaction procedures were optimized and scaled up, and major products were purified and analysed by NMR. Details of experimental protocol are given in Supplementary Information. Production assays in S. cinnamoneus strains All production experiments were carried out as follows. A 10 ml pre-culture in MP5 medium14 was launched in 50 ml Falcon tube on an orbital shaker (180 rpm) at 28 °C. The pre-culture was inoculated with either spores or mycelium fragments. After 48 h, 1 ml of pre-culture was used to inoculate 25 ml of MP5 medium in a 500 ml baffled Erlenmeyer flask, and the culture was incubated 7 days on an orbital shaker (180 rpm) at 28 °C. Supernatants were subsequently analysed by HPLC or LC-MS (for details, see Supplementary Information). HPLC and LC-MS analysis of the S. cinnamoneus culture supernatants Culture supernatants obtained after centrifugation of the culture were filtered on 0.2 µm MiniUniPrep filter (Whatman). When following “method A”, the filtered supernatants were analyzed on an Atlantis T3 column (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm, 30 °C) using an Agilent 1200 HPLC instrument equipped with a quaternary pump. Samples were eluted with isocratic 0.1% HCOOH in H2O (solvent A) / 0.1% HCOOH in CH3CN (solvent B) (95:5) at 1 ml/min for 5 min followed by a gradient to 100% solvent B over 45 min. Molecules that were present in the supernatant were detected by an Alltech 3300 evaporative light scattering detector (ELSD) (Grace). When necessary, an analysis of the cell content was made. The mycelium pellet obtained after centrifugation of 2 ml of culture, was washed twice with 2 ml of water, suspended in 400 µl of water and broken down with glass beads using the FastPrep-24 apparatus (MP Biomedicals). A cell-free extract was obtained after centrifugation (13,000 g, 4 °C, 30 min) to remove cell debris. LC-MS analyses were performed using an Agilent 1100 HPLC coupled via split system to an Esquire HCT ion trap mass spectrometer (Bruker) set in positive and negative modes. Multiple analyses were made. Some of them were made using “method A”, some other using the conditions described by15 for CDPS 1–47 and called “method B”.