Materials and Methods Chemicals and Molecular Biology Reagents Unless otherwise specified, antibiotics, media components and chemical reagents used in this work were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (United Kingdom) with the exception of soy flour, which was purchased from Holland & Barret (United Kingdom). Enzymes and molecular biology kits were purchased from New England Biolabs and Promega Healthcare, respectively. Bacterial Strains and Culture Conditions The following strains were used in this work: S. scabies DSM 41658, both the wild-type (WT) and the mutant strain ΔbtmL (ΔL), whose construction was described previously (Crone et al., 2012). Additionally, Escherichia coli K-12 strain DH5α (Invitrogen) was used for plasmid propagation and DNA manipulation, and the methylation deficient strain E. coli ET12567 containing pUZ8002 (Paget et al., 1999) was used for intergeneric conjugal transfer of genetic material to S. scabies, which was performed following standard procedures (Kieser et al., 2000). E. coli culture media used in this work are described in Sambrook et al. (1989). Several Streptomyces culture media were used: mannitol soya flour medium (SFM) (Kieser et al., 2000) was used for Streptomyces propagation and conjugations, and instant potato mash agar [2% Smash (Premier Foods), 2% agar] was used to grow S. scabies for spore harvesting. GYM medium (0.4% glucose, 0.4% yeast extract, and 1.0% malt extract, in Milli-Q water) and bottromycin production medium (BPM: 1% glucose, 1.5% soluble starch, 0.5% yeast extract, 1.0% soy flour, 0.5% NaCl, and 0.3% CaCO3, in Milli-Q water) were used for bottromycin production. Production experiments were performed as follows: 30 μL of concentrated spores were used to inoculate 10 mL of GYM medium in 50 mL flasks and were incubated for 48 h at 30°C and 250 rpm. 250 μL of seed culture were used to inoculate 10 mL BPM in 50 mL Falcon tubes covered with foam bungs instead of caps. Alternatively, 1 mL of seed culture was used to inoculate 50 mL of BPM in 250 mL flasks containing a spring. When necessary, cultures were supplemented with appropriate concentrations of CoCl2 (25 μg/mL unless otherwise stated). Triplicate production cultures were incubated for 5–6 days at 28°C and 230 rpm, at which point samples were collected and processed immediately, or frozen at −20°C until further processing and analysis. When antibiotic selection was necessary, culture media were supplemented with the appropriate antibiotics at the following final concentrations: kanamycin at 50 μg/mL, apramycin at 50 μg/mL, hygromycin at 50 μg/mL, chloramphenicol at 25 μg/mL, and nalidixic acid at 25 μg/mL. Gene Expression Plasmids Construction All the primers used for gene amplification and generation of the following constructs are listed in Supplementary Table S1. The gene expression vectors used in this work were pIB139-RBS-btmD (Crone et al., 2016) and pIJ10257 (Hong et al., 2005), which are both integrative plasmids containing the constitutive ermE∗ promoter. pIB139-RBS-btmD is a derivative of pIB139 (Wilkinson et al., 2002) that carries the btmD gene preceded by a ribosome binding site (RBS) and an NdeI restriction site installed to facilitate cloning and improve gene expression (Crone et al., 2016). This plasmid was linearized using restriction enzymes NdeI and EcoRI, releasing btmD and allowing the introduction of the gene of interest, either via ligation of an EcoRI/NdeI treated PCR fragment or by Gibson assembly, following published protocols (Crone et al., 2012). The ligation method was used to introduce btmL and generate pIB139-RBS-btmL, which was used to complement the mutant ΔbtmL and to overexpress this gene in the WT strain (WT + L). The Gibson assembly method was used to introduce mtrA, mtrB, glnB, SCAB_85931, and SCAB_51451, into pIB139-RBS for gene overexpression the WT strain. An empty version of pIB139-RBS was generated to use as a control in production experiments, via Gibson assembly, using the NdeI/EcoRI linearized vector and primers pIB-RBS_fw and pIB-RBS_rv, carrying the RBS sequence. pIJ10257 was used for the expression of btmA. This gene was amplified using primers btmA-start and btmA-end, digested with NdeI and HindIII and ligated into NdeI/HindIII digested pIJ10257. Correct construction of all expression plasmids was confirmed using colony PCR and sequencing, after which they were transferred to E. coli ET12567/pUZ8002 cells for conjugation into S. scabies (WT or ΔbtmL as appropriate). pIB139 integrates in the ϕC31 phage integration site, and pIJ10257 integrates in the ϕBT1 site, which allowed for the simultaneous overexpression of two genes when necessary. Correct integration of the plasmids was verified by colony PCR using ermEp_chk1 in combination with the reverse amplification primer for each of the genes. As a control for the production experiments, a strain carrying the corresponding empty vector was generated in each case. LC-MS Analysis of Bottromycin Production Bottromycin production culture samples (1 mL) were extracted with an equal volume of methanol, mixed with shaking for a minimum of 10 min. The mixtures were then centrifuged for 4 min at 13,000 rpm to pellet cellular material and other particulate contaminants. 2 μL of the resulting supernatants were injected onto a Phenomenex Kinetex 2.6 μm XB-C18 column (50 mm × 2.1 mm, 100 Å) attached to a Shimadzu Nexera X2 UHPLC and eluted with a linear gradient of 5 to 95% acetonitrile (ACN) in water + 0.1% formic acid (FA) over 6 min, with a flow-rate of 0.6 mL/min. MS data were obtained in positive mode using a Shimadzu IT-TOF mass spectrometer coupled to the UHPLC and analyzed using LabSolutions software (Shimadzu). Bottromycin production was plotted in peak area units. To normalize production values across samples, culture growth was quantified by measuring DNA concentration with an adaptation of the Burton diphenylamine colorimetric assay (Zhao et al., 2013). Isolation of Total RNA Two milliliter samples of S. scabies liquid cultures were harvested after 72 h incubation in conditions as described above. Samples were washed with an equal volume of RNAlater (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at −80°C until further processing. RNA was then extracted following previous protocols (Crone et al., 2016), resuspending the mycelium in 1 mL of RLT buffer from the RNeasy Kit (Qiagen) and homogenizing the sample in lysing matrix B tubes (MP Biomedicals) using a FastPrep instrument and a program of 3 × 30 s pulses at 6 m/s with 1 min cooling intervals on ice. The lysates were then centrifuged at 13,000 rpm and 700 μL of supernatant from each sample were then transferred to spin tubes from the RNeasy Kit to undergo purification following manufacturer instructions. Chromosomal DNA contamination was eliminated with on-column DNase I treatment (Qiagen) and a further cleanup step using TURBO DNA-free Kit (Ambion, Invitrogen). RNA concentration in the samples was quantified measuring A260 using a Nanodrop. In the case of the samples for 5′tag-RNAseq, further quantity and integrity measurements were performed with RNA ScreenTape (Agilent). RT and qRT-PCR Analyses Both RT-PCR and qRT-PCR analyses were carried out using 250 ng of total RNA as template in a two-step protocol. The first step consisted of cDNA synthesis with the QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen), as detailed in the manufacturer’s instructions. For RT-PCR analyses the cDNA was then used as a template for PCR reactions using Taq polymerase and specific primers for the regions to test (Supplementary Table S1). The amplification conditions were as follows: initial denaturation at 95°C for 3 min followed by 33 cycles of 95°C for 30 s, 58–62°C for 30 s and 72°C for 40–60 s, with a final extension step at 72°C for 5 min. The resulting RT-PCR products were separated in 2% agarose gels and stained with ethidium bromide for visualization. For qRT-PCR analyses the aforementioned cDNA was used as template in quantitative reactions with the SensiFAST SYBR No-ROX Kit (Bioline) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The reactions were run in a Bio-Rad CFX96 thermocycler and the amplification protocol was a 2-step cycling PCR program: 1 cycle at 95°C for 2 min followed by 40 cycles of 5 s at 95°C and 30 s at 60°C. An additional melting curve step was used at the end of the reaction to assess the specificity of the amplified products. The qRT-PCR results were analyzed with CFX Manager software (Bio-Rad). In both cases, negative control samples of the cDNA synthesis step with no retrotranscriptase were included, in order to control for the presence of contaminating chromosomal DNA in the RNA samples. Primers used in these analyses (Supplementary Table S1) were designed with a preference for 17–23 mers and Tm ∼ 65°C with the help of Vector NTI Advance 11.5 (Invitrogen) and Primer3 software (Untergasser et al., 2012) and validated used the online tool NetPrimer (Premier Biosoft). In the specific case of qRT-PCR primers, these were designed to amplify fragments of ∼100 bp and their efficiency was tested using serial dilutions of chromosomic DNA as template. For both RT-PCR and qRT-PCR, primers for hrdB, encoding a housekeeping sigma factor, were used as an internal control to assess the quality of RNA and in the latter case to normalize gene expression levels. 5′tag-RNA-Seq (tagRNA-Seq) Library Construction and Sequencing Total RNA samples of S. scabies WT and ΔbtmL were extracted as previously described and, following quality control assays to ensure their integrity, they were submitted to Vertis Biotechnologie AG (Germany) for the construction and sequencing of tagRNA-seq libraries in a protocol adapted from the technique described in Innocenti et al. (2015). Prior to library construction, rRNA was depleted in the samples using the Ribo-Zero rRNA Removal Kit for bacteria (Epicenter). The remaining material was labeled sequentially as follows: sequence tag CTGAAGCT was ligated to transcripts presenting 5′-monophosphate groups (processed transcripts). The samples were then treated with RNA 5′ polyphosphatase (5′PP; Epicenter) to convert the 5′-triphosphate groups of primary transcripts into 5′-monophosphate ends amenable for ligation with the alternative tag sequence TAATGCGC. Once labeled, the samples were used as template for first-strand cDNA synthesis using random hexameric primers. After fragmentation and RNA clean up, Illumina TruSeq sequencing adapters were ligated in a strand specific manner to the 5′ and 3′ ends of the cDNA fragments. The cDNA was then amplified with a proof-reading enzyme to enrich the samples. At this point, it is possible to specifically PCR amplify the 5′-ends which carried the two tag sequences, but that would mean losing the information relating to the rest of the transcriptome. Therefore, a full transcriptome enrichment (for fragments that had Illumina adapters on both ends) was carried out in order to preserve the full coverage of the transcriptome in our libraries. The resulting material was purified with the Agencourt AMPure XP Kit (Beckman Coulter Genomics) and analyzed by capillary electrophoresis. The cDNA preparations were pooled in equimolar amounts and size selected (240–450 bp range) and the pooled libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 system using 75 bp read lengths. RNA-seq data has been deposited in the ArrayExpress database (accession number E-MTAB-8236). Data Analysis Sequencing reads were first sorted according to their tags in order to generate independent fastq files for each of the datasets (see Supplementary Table S2 for a summary of the sequencing results). Once sorted, the reads were trimmed to remove the tag sequences and aligned to S. scabies 87-22 genome (RefSeq NC_013929.1) using Bowtie2 (Langmead and Salzberg, 2012), which yielded SAM alignment files for each of the fastq files. Downstream processing of the SAM alignment files was performed using a series of Perl scripts supported by the Bioperl (Stajich et al., 2002) toolkit. Using the SAM alignments as input, the number of reads mapping to each nucleotide position of the S. scabies genome was calculated and saved in a coverage file. The coverage information was then integrated with a feature table including the coordinates of all of the gene coding sequences in the genome, in order to calculate the number of reads per gene, or gene counts. These gene counts were used to make an estimation of gene expression levels by calculating RPKM and TPM values for each gene (Wagner et al., 2012) (Supplementary Datasheet S1). For mapping and visualization of the transcription start sites (TSSs) in the bottromycin cluster, the SAM files containing the sequences labeled with 5′ tags were transformed into wig files suitable for visualization in the Integrated Genome Browser (IGB) software (Freese et al., 2016) plotted against the S. scabies genome. These files were normalized to eliminate biases due to difference in sequencing depth using the normalizeQuantiles function in the limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015) of R (R Core Team, 2014). Given the high amount of processed transcripts present in the btmC-D region of the bottromycin cluster, a “wig minus wig” file was generated in which processed transcript reads were subtracted from the primary transcript reads. The regions mapped in this filtered file were considered to be true TSSs. 5′-RACE Experiments The TSSs identified in the 5′tag-RNA-seq experiment were validated using a 5′-RACE system for rapid amplification of cDNA ends (Invitrogen), using the manufacturer’s instructions (version 2.0). 1 μg of total RNA from S. scabies WT and ΔbtmL harvested after 72 h of growth at 28°C and 230 rpm was used to carry out cDNA synthesis with specific primers for each of the promoters tested (Supplementary Table S1). The cDNA was purified and treated with terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) to add poly(dC) tails to its 3′ends. After an initial PCR amplification of the tailed fragments with the 5′-RACE abridged anchor primer and subsequent amplifications with the universal amplification primer (both provided by the kit) and specific nested primers (Supplementary Table S1), defined amplification products were observed. These products were gel purified and submitted for Sanger sequencing to confirm the position of the TSSs. gusA Transcriptional Fusions Construction and β-Glucuronidase Reporter Activity Assays Putative promoter regions of btmC (btmCp, 414 bp) and btmD (btmDp, 545 bp) and extended promoter regions spanning different lengths of btmC were amplified from S. scabies genomic DNA or from a refactored bottromycin cluster containing 33 synonymous point mutations in the btmDTTS region (Supplementary Figure S4) with primers containing NdeI and XhoI restriction sites (Supplementary Table S1). These were verified by sequencing, and then ligated or assembled into NdeI/XhoI digested pIJ10742, which contains a promoterless copy of the reporter gene gusA (Feeney et al., 2017). These plasmids were introduced via intergeneric conjugation into S. scabies (WT, ΔbtmL, and WT + L) using E. coli ET12567/pUZ8002, where they integrated in the ϕBT1 phage integration site. Hygromycin resistant exconjugants were analyzed by colony PCR with primers pGUS_chk_fw and pGUS_chk_fw. β-glucuronidase assays in solid and liquid medium were carried out as described previously (Sherwood and Bibb, 2013). In the case of the liquid assays, reporter activity was represented as Miller units/mg protein. In both cases, pIJ10742 carrying no promoter was used as a negative control, and pIJ10741, carrying gusA under the control of ermE∗p (Feeney et al., 2017), was included as a positive control of promoter activity. DNA Affinity Protein Capture Assay Sample Preparation The intergenic region btmB-btmC (414 bp) was PCR amplified using primers probe_BC_fw2_b and probe_BC_rv2 to generate a 5′ biotinylated probe. 40 μg of this probe were inmobilised onto 10 mg of streptavidin magnetic beads (Dynabeads® MyOneTM Streptavidin T1, Invitrogen, United Kingdom), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein extracts from S. scabies wild type were obtained from 500 mL cultures in either BPM or GYM incubated for 72 h at 28°C and 250 rpm. Cell pellets were harvested by centrifugation for 15 min at 7,000 rpm, resuspended in binding buffer (20 mM TrisHCl pH7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, and 1 mM DTT) supplemented with protease inhibitors (cOmpleteTM Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche, United Kingdom) and lysed by sonication with a Vibra-cell sonicator (Sonics & Materials Inc., United States) using 150 × 2 s pulses at 40% amplitude alternated by 5 s rest on ice. Binding assays were performed using a modification of the protocol reported by Bekiesch et al. (2016) using 60 mg of total protein in a 10 mL final volume of the aforementioned binding buffer supplemented with 0.1 mg/mL of salmon sperm DNA (Invitrogen, Germany). Proteins were eluted twice in 250 μL binding buffer containing 2 M NaCl and the binding assay was repeated twice for each sample, generating 1 mL of final eluate per sample. These eluates were then acidified to pH3 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and applied to an C4 SPE column (OMIX C4, Agilent). The samples were washed twice with 0.1% TFA in water and three times with 0.1% FA before eluting in three fractions (200 μL 30% ACN and 0.1% FA, 200 μL 30% ACN and 200 μL 70% ACN) that were pooled and kept frozen on dry ice until analysis. Sample Analysis After purification and clean up, duplicate samples for each condition were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap-FusionTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, United Kingdom) equipped with an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano System using an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (2 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, Thermo). Samples were loaded and trapped using a pre-column which was then switched in-line to the analytical column for separation. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 5–40% ACN in water/0.1% FA at a rate of 0.5% min–1. The column was connected to a 10 μm SilicaTipTM nanospray emitter (New Objective, United States) for infusion into the mass spectrometer. Data dependent analysis was performed using a CID/HCD fragmentation method with the following parameters: positive ion mode, orbitrap MS resolution = 60 k, mass range (quadrupole) = 300–1500 m/z, AGC target 2e5, MS2 in ion trap, threshold 1e4, isolation window 1.6 Da (quadrupole), charge states 2–6, MS2 top20, AGC target 1.5e4, max inject time 200 ms, dynamic exclusion 1 count, 60 s exclusion, exclusion mass window ±7 ppm. MS scans were saved in profile mode while MS2 scans were saved in centroid mode. Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) (Tyanova et al., 2016). The peak lists were searched against a S. scabies protein database downloaded from Uniprot.org (25.05.2016) with 16846 entries together with the MaxQuant contaminants database (249 entries) using an in-house Mascot Server (2.4.1, Matrix Science, United Kingdom) with trypsin with 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed and oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-terminus), and deamidation (N,Q) as variable modifications. Mass tolerances were 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Mascot search results were imported into the Scaffold software (Proteome Software Inc., United States) to probabilistically validate protein identifications derived from the MS/MS sequencing results using the X!Tandem (Craig and Beavis, 2003) and ProteinProphet algorithms (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Validation parameters were set to 95% protein probability and 95% peptide probability.