Materials and Methods Bacterial Strains and Growth Conditions. Except where indicated, S. aureus strains (SI Appendix, Table S1) were routinely grown at 37 °C shaking at 180 rpm in tryptic soy broth (TSB) with glucose or statically on tryptic soy agar. Chloramphenicol and tetracycline were added when needed to maintain selection of plasmids at 10 and 12.5 µg/mL, respectively. Plasmids used in this study are listed in SI Appendix, Table S2. Q5 polymerase, T4 PNK, T4 ligase, and restriction enzymes were purchased from New England Biolabs. Oligonucleotides (SI Appendix, Table S3) were custom synthesized by Sigma Aldrich. Construction of PSMα Inducible Construct. pTX hld+psmα1-4 was derived from pTX psmα1-4 plasmid (17). The hld locus was amplified from LAC genomic DNA using primers hld BamHI Forward and hld BamHI Reverse. The product and pTX psmα1-4 were digested with BamHI, ligated, and S. aureus RN4220 cells were transformed with the ligation product. A single colony harboring the construct with hld in the correct orientation to achieve expression was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Construction of Transporter Encoding Plasmids. pRB473 pmtCD was constructed by deleting the pmtAB coding sequence by inverse PCR from pRB473 pmtABCD (17). However, this construct failed to maintain native protein levels of PmtD by western blot (42) in the LAC Δpsmαβhld ΔpmtABCD ΔabcA background. Therefore, we screened several heterologous promoters driving expression of pmtCD for PmtD levels and chose a short segment (Pint) derived from the intergenic region between pbp4 and abcA. Both strands of Pint were synthesized, annealed, and inserted into pRB473 at the EcoRI and KpnI sites. The pmtABCD operon was subcloned from pRB473 pmtABCD downstream of Pint using the KpnI and XbaI restriction sites. The pmtAB coding sequences were deleted by inverse PCR to yield pRB473 Pint-pmtCD. The abcA open reading frame (ORF) and upstream region, as previously reported (18), was cloned into pRB473. The pmtCD and abcA orthologs from S. epidermidis and S. haemolyticus were amplified using genomic DNA from the corresponding species and subcloned into pRB473. Construction of Chromosomal Deletions in S. aureus LAC. Chromosomal deletions were conducted using pIMAY (43). Briefly, Q5 polymerase was used to amplify the targeted ORF plus 1 kb homology arms using the indicated oligos (SI Appendix, Table S3) and LAC genomic DNA as template. The PCR product was inserted blunt into the EcoRV restriction site of pIMAY. The ORF was deleted by inverse PCR using Q5 polymerase and the indicated oligos. All constructs were confirmed by restriction digestion and Sanger sequencing. The parent strain was transformed with the pIMAY construct by electroporation. Single colonies were passaged once at 28 °C, three times at 37 °C, and once more at 28 °C. Plasmid excision was selected for by growing cells in the presence of 1 µg/mL anhydrotetracycline. Single colonies were screened for loss of chloramphenicol resistance and for the desired deletion by PCR. Deletions were further confirmed by Sanger sequencing of the PCR product. Cell-Based Secretion Assay. PSM secretion was assayed as before (19) with modifications. Starter cultures were diluted into TSB without glucose supplemented with chloramphenicol and tetracycline to an OD600 = 0.200. Cells were incubated, shaking at 37 °C, 180 rpm for 4 h. D-xylose was added to 0.5% (w/v), and cells were cultured for one additional hour. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 13,200 rpm for 2 min in a microcentrifuge, and the supernatants (extracellular fraction) were collected and analyzed for PSMs by injecting 100 µL into a HPLC (Agilent 1260) connected inline to a quadrupole mass spectrometer (MS, Agilent 6120) performed exactly as before (44) using a 2.1 × 5 mm C8 column with increasing gradients of acetonitrile (ACN) + 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to wash the column and elute PSMs. Peptides were detected based on elution time and ion m/z. PSM secretion was quantified by summing the extracted ion chromatogram (EIC) peak area from two ionized (m/z) species per PSM. PSM Standard Curves. Synthetic peptides with N-formylation of each α-type PSM (Peptide 2.0) were used to generate standard curves and test for a linear response. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in DMSO to 10 mg/mL. Concentration series were prepared in 10% ACN + 0.1% TFA and analyzed by HPLC-MS. For each PSM, the EIC peak area as a function of PSM concentration was fit to a linear model ( EICi=βi∗[PSMi] ), and the slopes ( βi ) of the model fits were used to generate figures showing absolute PSM concentration. PSM Spike-Ins of Culture Supernatants. Culture supernatants of LAC Δpsmαβhld, ΔpmtABCD, ΔabcA pTX hld-psmα1-4, and either pRB473 Pint-pmtCD or pRB473 abcA were prepared from cultures just before the addition of D-xylose by centrifugation. A cocktail of synthetic S. aureus α-type PSMs was mixed to 20X concentration in 50% ACN + 0.1% TFA and spiked into culture supernatants to 1X at either 50 or 250 nM per PSM (2.5% ACN + 0.005% TFA). PSMs in culture supernatants were measured by HPLC-MS. Transport Preference Metric. Individual PSMs have indistinguishable ionization efficiencies regardless of sample origination, and detection by HPLC-MS is linear relative to PSM concentration (Fig. 1 B and C). Thus, we compared the relative secretion of each PSM between cells encoding pmtCD or abcA by calculating the transport probability for each PSM ( i ) through PmtCD asPi(pmtCD)=EICi,pmtCDEICi,pmtCD+EICi,abcA. The use of the EIC is more direct than absolute PSM concentrations, which rely on transformations using standard curves that, moreover, would mathematically cancel out. Logistic regression is commonly used to regress probabilities on quantitative data. To test the association of PSM transport through PmtCD with PSM hydrophobicity (GRAVY score) and Pi(pmtCD), we performed a logistic transformation using the logit function:logitPipmtCD=logPipmtCD1-PipmtCD=β0+β1∗GRAVYi. Significance was determined using the F test and the null hypothesis of β1=0. LL-37 Sensitivity Assay. LL-37 was purchased from Bio-Synthesis (lot #P6417-1), resuspended to 1 mg/mL in 0.01% acetic acid, and stored at −20 °C until needed. Starter cultures supplemented with chloramphenicol were diluted to an OD600 = 0.1 in specialized bicarbonate-containing media (24, 45) supplemented with chloramphenicol. Cells were cultured shaking for 2.5 h at 37 °C after which cells were collected by centrifugation, resuspended with fresh bicarbonate-containing media without antibiotics to an OD600 = 0.1 (108 CFUs/mL), de-clumped by repeated (5×) passage through a 25 G blunt needle, and treated at 37 °C for 3 h with 150 µg/mL LL-37. Viable cells were enumerated by counting single colonies that formed overnight after plating serial dilutions of the treated cells.