3. Methods 3.1. Homology Modeling and Sampling We used the Swiss–Model server homology modeling pipeline for protein homology modeling [46]. The structure of the human skeletal-muscle voltage-gated sodium ion channel (hNaV1.4) was used as a template, against which all amino acid sequences were modeled (6AGF, [43]). We chose this template for two reasons, the high resolution of the selectivity filter in this channel structure (up to 2.8 Å) along with the fact that this structure captures the open-channel conformation of the pore [43]. Because TTX block increases with repeated channel opening, it is likely that TTX binds to and blocks the open conformation of VGSCs [47]. Thus, we analyzed TTX docking in models of the pore in the open-channel conformation. We analyzed a total of eight VGSCs that included seven vertebrate NaV1.4 sequences and a single invertebrate sequence (NaV1). We limited our vertebrate sequences to NaV1.4 sequences to avoid VGSCs that are TTX insensitive because of selection for function rather TTX resistance (e.g., mammalian cardiac muscle channels; NaV1.5). Our sampling included TTX-sensitive channels from a mammal species (rat Rattus norvegicus; rNaV1.4; P15390), a salamander species (Ambystoma mavortium; AmNaV1.4; AIX03051), and a Thamnophis sirtalis snake population (Illinois; TsNaV1.4IL; AYG96483). We also included NaV1.4 channels from two salamander species (Salamandra salamandra and Tylototriton shanjing) and a single population of Thamnophis sirtalis from Oregon (Benton) that possess moderate levels of TTX resistance: SsNaV1.4 (AIX03050), TshanNaV1.4 (AIX03049), and TsNaV1.4BN (AAW68222). The moderately resistant channels are blocked by TTX concentrations in the 50–100 nM range [9,10]. Salamandra and Tylototriton are related to Taricha and previous work suggests that they represent evolutionary links between a TTX-sensitive ancestor of all newts and highly TTX-resistant TTX-bearing salamanders such as Taricha newts [9]. Finally, we modelled “super-resistant” NaV1.4 channels from a salamander species, Taricha granulosa (TgNaV1.4; AIX03043), a population of highly resistant Thamnophis sirtalis from California (Willow Creek; TsNaV1.4WC; AAW68224) as well as the primary channel expressed in neurons of all invertebrates (NaV1) from the Greater Blue-Ringed Octopus Hapalochlaena lunulata (HlNaV1; QPI69428). Amino acid sequences were taken from either Genbank or UniprotKB. We used a mix of full coding sequence as well as partial coding sequence for our analysis. Only a partial coding sequence was available for the salamander species we included in our study. To increase the accuracy of our modeling of the channel pore, we used partial sequences that included 27 amino acids upstream of the start of the fifth transmembrane helix in domain I through 10 amino acids beyond the end of the sixth transmembrane helix in domain IV. 3.2. TTX Docking We used two different tools (AutoDock Vina (version 1.2.3, https://vina.scripps.edu/, accessed on 15 January 2022) and GNINA (version 1.0.1, https://github.com/gnina/gnina, accessed on 15 September 2022)) and three different analyses (fixed versus flexible amino acid sidechains, see below) to examine TTX docking for all channels. [44,45,48]. We downloaded the structure of TTX from Protein Data Bank (9SR, [41]) and prepared the TTX ligand for docking. We converted the TTX structure data file (9SR) to a PDB file format using Open Babel software [49] to upload it to AutoDock Tools. We used AutoDock Tools to add all hydrogens as well as all charges to TTX and channels to prepare the homology models and TTX for docking analysis with AutoDock Vina and GNINA. We used a search volume of 8 Å × 8 Å × 10 Å centered between the selectivity filter and the outer negatively charged ring in the pore of all homology models to dock TTX in fixed-position channel models (AutoDock Vina (VINA-R) and GNINA (GNINA-R)). We used the “autobox_ligand” feature of GNINA (GNINA-F) to define the search volume using docked TTX pdb files from GNINA outputted by the fixed-position channel analysis (GNINA-R) to dock TTX into channel models with flexible sidechains. We used the “flexdist” and “flexdist_ligand” features of GNINA to render all the sidechains within 4 Å of the search volume flexible during docking. All of these analyses yielded the nine best binding poses of TTX (modes) for each homology model ranked by binding affinity score. We used the pose with the lowest energy score for structure analysis as well as for our estimate of binding energy for among channel comparisons. 3.3. Structure Analysis We used PyMOL-pdb viewer (version 2.5.2, https://pymol.org/2/, accessed on 20 August 2021) to visualize TTX docked in the channels [50]. We used PyMOL (version 2.5.2, https://pymol.org/2/, accessed on 20 August 2021) to identify polar contacts between TTX, in the pose with the lowest energy score, and our homology models. PyMOL emulates the DSSP secondary structure assignment algorithm to determine whether atoms form polar contacts [51].