MATERIALS AND METHODS Participants An a priori power analysis was performed based on the effect sizes of morning versus evening isometric forces for the elbow flexors (Gauthier et al., 1996; Guette et al., 2005a) and knee extensors (Giacomoni et al., 2005). The power analysis was performed as described by Beck (2013) for a within‐between interaction with α set at 0.05, power set at 0.80, two groups, two measurements, and an effect size of (0.30). The power analysis computed 24 participants for adequate statistical power and a total of 29 participants were enrolled in the study with 27 completing all visits. The participants reported an absence of injury and disease and provided written informed consent before participation in the study. The participant demographics are shown in Table 1. A menstrual status questionnaire was completed by the female participants, eight of whom reported hormonal contraceptive use, while the others indicated eumenorrhea. Of those, it was indicated that the majority (n = 5) completed testing during the luteal phase while some (n = 2) completed testing during the follicular phase based on the questionnaire. All participants self‐reported they were physically active at the time of their enrollment. The average resistance training experience was ~6 years for males and ~4 years for females. All procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board for Human Subjects at Texas Christian University (IRB#1920‐342). Participant demographics along with self‐reported sleep time the night before morning (AM) and evening (PM) testing visits Female

n = 15 Male

n = 12. Female n = 15 Male n = 12 Age (yr) 23 (3) 24 (3). Height (cm) 166.6 (7.1) 177.5 (5.1). Weight (kg) 66.1 (16.8) 87.8 (15.5). Sleep (hr) AM 7.5 (1.2) 6.9 (1.1). PM 7.1 (1.3) 7.4 (0.9). Hormonal contraceptives n = 8. Menstrual phase of testing Follicular n = 2
Luteal n = 5. Follicular n = 2 Luteal n = 5 Experimental design This study used a crossover design to determine whether neuromuscular function differs between the morning (07:00–09:00) versus the evening (17:00–19:00) hours. Before the experimental visits, participants completed a familiarization session that was randomized to either the morning or the evening hours of testing. The participants practiced each of the experimental tasks ~3× for the upper and lower limb. The participants were instructed to refrain from exercise 24–48 h before visiting the laboratory and maintain normal sleep and nutrition routines. A primary aim was to determine whether sex influences the time‐of‐day effects on neuromuscular function. A secondary aim was to examine the influences of time of day on the neuromuscular function between the large muscle groups of the upper versus lower limbs. Maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) force, normalized RFD (nRFD), maximal EMG amplitude, the normalized rate of rise of the EMG (nRER) signal, and submaximal force steadiness were used to quantify neuromuscular function. Force testing was performed on the elbow flexors and knee extensors in a randomized order with the corresponding surface EMG responses collected from the biceps brachii and vastus lateralis. The experimental visits were 1 h in duration and were completed 3–7 days between sessions. Experimental procedures Isometric force Isometric force of the knee extensors and elbow flexors were measured in custom‐made testing apparatuses with a tension‐compression load cell (SSM‐500, Interface Inc., Scottsdale, AZ.). For the knee extension assessment, the participant was seated on a knee extension machine with their hip and knee angles positioned at 90°. For elbow flexor assessment, the shoulder and elbow angles were placed at 90° with a goniometer while the participant was in a seated position. A cuff attached to the load cell was placed around the wrist of the participant to measure elbow flexion force. The force testing procedures were the same for the knee extensors and elbow flexors. Specifically, a series of submaximal isometric contractions were performed to warm up the respective joint by performing a 3‐s isometric contraction at 25%, 50%, 75%, and 90% of their perceived maximal force with 1 min of recovery between attempts. Following the warm‐up, maximal force and RFD were assessed under two conditions (i.e., “fast” and “hard”), as suggested by Maffiuletti et al. (2016). The first series consisted of three fast, ballistic intent maximal contractions. The participant was instructed to exert their maximal force as rapidly as possible with ballistic intent. Each contraction was 1‐s in duration with 1 min of recovery between attempts. For the second series of maximal contractions, the participant was instructed to exert their maximal force as hard as possible with maximum force intent. Each contraction was performed three times and was 3‐s in duration with 1 min of recovery between attempts. Similarly, the RER and maximal EMG amplitude values were quantified from the fast and hard contractions, respectively. In total, six maximal contractions were performed for each muscle group, the results of which were averaged within conditions (i.e., fast and hard) for statistical analysis. Submaximal force steadiness Following the determination of isometric force, submaximal force steadiness was measured with a trapezoidal force matching task at 30% MVC. The participants received real‐time force feedback displayed on a 32” TV screen that was approximately 1 meter in front of them at eye level and were instructed to match their force output as closely as possible to the template. The participants increased their force output at a rate of 10% MVC/s, held as steadily as possible at the 30% MVC target force for 9 s, and then decreased their force output at a rate of 10% MVC/s. This task was performed 3 times for each muscle group. The coefficient of variation (CoV) was used to quantify force steadiness during the plateau of the force‐matching task. The coefficient of variation was calculated for each submaximal force‐matching task and was averaged for the respective muscle group and visit for statistical analysis. The first and final 0.5 s of the plateau were not included in the force steadiness analyses given the changes brought about by the rising and falling force tracing, as a result, only the mean of the 8 s plateau during the submaximal contraction was used to determine submaximal force steadiness. Instrumentation and signal processing The EMG signals were obtained with TrignoTM wireless bipolar surface EMG sensors (interelectrode distance =10 mm, 37 mm × 26 mm × 15 mm; Delsys Inc., Natick, MA, USA). The surface electrodes were placed over the vastus lateralis and biceps brachii muscles of the dominant leg and arm following international standards for surface EMG (Hermens, 2000). Specifically, the placement of the EMG electrode on the vastus lateralis was at ~66% distance between the anterior superior iliac spine and lateral aspect of the patella. For the biceps brachii, the electrode was placed approximately halfway between the acromion process and the antecubital space at the peak of the muscle belly. Before sensor placement, the sensor pick‐up area was shaved and cleaned with alcohol swabs to remove hair and debris. The electrode sites were outlined with a waterproof felt‐tip pen for replication. Both the force and EMG signals were sampled at 1926 k Hz and were stored on a laptop computer (Intel Core i7 8th generation). Custom software (LabVIEW, National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) was used for the force and EMG signal processing. The force signal was smoothed with a 25 ms zero‐shift moving average and the EMG signals were pre‐amplified and bandpass filtered (20–450 Hz) with a 25 ms zero‐shift moving RMS. The onsets of force and EMG were visually determined by placing cursors around the regions of interest and magnifying the scale of their time curves in separate plots. The force and EMG onsets were identified as the point at which the signal deflected 2 SD away from baseline values. The MVC force was selected from the highest 500 ms mean value during the plateau of the hard MVC. The amplitude of the EMG signal was quantified as the highest 100 ms root mean square value of the EMG signal during the hard MVC. RFD was determined from the linear slope of the force‐time curve at time intervals of 0–50 (nRFD50), 0–100 (nRFD100) ms, and the peak rate of change in the force‐time curve (nRFDpeak) from force onset of the fast MVC and were normalized against the maximal force value obtained during the hard MVC. The RER was quantified from the linear slope of the EMG‐time curve at intervals of 0–30 (nRER30) and 0–50 (nRER50) ms from EMG onset of the fast MVC and were normalized against the maximal EMG value obtained during the hard MVC. Unpublished test‐retest intersession reliability from our laboratory shows good‐excellent reliability for assessments of maximal isometric force (ICC2,1 > 0.95, SEM% = ~3.0%) and maximal EMG RMS (ICC2,1 > 0.95, SEM% = ~8.0%). Statistical analysis Data are presented as means ± standard deviations. Separate three‐way (time‐of‐day [morning, evening] × sex [male, female] × limb [elbow flexor, knee extensor]) mixed factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA) tests were used to analyze the force and EMG data. Significant interactions and main effects were followed up with simple effects tests and Holm‐Bonferroni pairwise comparisons, respectively. The Shapiro‐Wilk test was used to determine normal distribution of the data and Levene’s test was used for homogeneity of variances between groups. The partial eta squared (ηp
2) statistic is provided for all repeated measures ANOVAs, with values of 0.01, 0.06, and 0.14 corresponding to small, moderate, and large effects, respectively (Stevens, 2007). Additionally, Cohen’s d and Hedge’s g were computed to interpret the effect size for specific mean comparisons of interest with traditional values of 0.20, 0.50, and 0.80 corresponding to small, moderate, and large effects, respectively (Cohen, 1988). SPSS software (IBM, Version 26) was used for statistical analysis and alpha was set at 0.05.