Introduction Mycophenolic acid (MPA) is one of the main metabolites produced by fungi of the genus Penicillium [1, 2]. From a chemical point of view, MPA is a meroterpenoid composed of a phthalide moiety substituted by a terpenoid side chain. Since its discovery and over the years, MPA has been shown to have antibacterial, antitumoral and antiviral properties [3]. However, by far the most important clinical application of this compound is its use as an immunosuppressant in transplantation patients, and MPA derivatives are currently commercially available for this purpose [3, 4]. The molecular basis of the biosynthesis of MPA was unknown until recently. The genomic cluster that may be responsible for MPA biosynthesis has been identified in P. brevicompactum [4–6]. In this fungus, the cluster consists of seven genes named mpaA (encoding a putative prenyltransferase), mpaB (encoding a protein with unknown function), mpaC (encoding a polyketide synthase), mpaDE (encoding a natural fusion of a cytochrome P450 domain and a hydrolase domain), mpaF (encoding a protein with high similarity to inosine-5´-monophosphate dehydrogenase, IMPDH), mpaG (encoding an O-methyltransferase) and mpaH (encoding an oxidative cleavage enzyme) [4–6]. Thus far, by using different techniques, only three out of the seven mpa genes from P. brevicompactum have been experimentally shown to be involved in MPA biosynthesis. The mpaC gene was characterized by gene disruption. A mutant strain lacking this gene lost its ability to produce MPA [4]. MpaC catalyzes the formation of 5-methylorsellinic acid (5-MOA), which is the first step in MPA biosynthesis [4]. Regarding mpaDE, this gene was biochemically characterized in vivo by heterologous expression in a strain of Aspergillus nidulans that expresses mpaC and is able to produce 5-MOA [5]. This biochemical characterization allowed the reconstitution of the second step in MPA biosynthesis: the consecutive transformation of 5-MOA to 4,6-dihydroxy-2-(hydroxymethyl)-3-methylbenzoic acid and 5,7-dihydroxy-4-methylphthalide (DHMP) by the bifunctional enzyme MpaDE [5]. Finally, MpaG, the putative O-methyl transferase, was biochemically characterized in vitro. The mpaG gene from P. brevicompactum was overexpressed in E. coli and the recombinant MpaG protein was purified and used to reconstitute its activity with pure substrates [6]. The results indicate that MpaG catalyzes the methylation of demethylmycophenolic acid (DMMPA) to produce MPA, the last step in the biosynthesis of this compound [6]. To the best of our knowledge, the role of the other four mpa genes in the biosynthesis of MPA has not yet been experimentally addressed. Penicillium roqueforti is a filamentous fungus that is very important to the food industry. This fungus is responsible in large measure for the organoleptic properties of several types of blue-veined cheeses from different countries, such as Roquefort, Stilton, Danablu and Cabrales. In addition, this fungus is an active producer of several secondary metabolites, including MPA [2, 7, 8]. The presence of MPA in different types of cheeses ripened with P. roqueforti has been demonstrated and has been a constant concern [9–14]. On the other hand, recent experiments suggest that P. roqueforti strains submitted to random-mutagenesis by UV and gamma irradiation may be suitable for the commercial production of MPA [15]. Therefore, knowledge of the molecular basis underlying to the biosynthesis of MPA in P. roqueforti would be very useful for both the control of MPA contamination in cheeses and the potential commercial production of MPA. However, to date the biosynthetic pathway of MPA in P. roqueforti remains totally unknown. In this work, we identified a genomic region of approximately 24.4 kbp containing a seven-gene cluster (the mpa cluster) that may be responsible for the MPA biosynthesis in P. roqueforti. Of greater interest, the functional analysis of these genes suggests that all of the seven genes are necessary for the production of MPA by the fungus.