1. Introduction The introduction of antibiotics once reduced human morbidity and mortality caused by infectious diseases dramatically. For example, human morbidity and mortality by tuberculosis were greatly reduced after the introduction of streptomycin and kanamycin. However, the emergence of multidrug resistant pathogenic bacteria reverted the situation drastically once again. Moreover, the situation of multidrug resistance is getting worse and worse. WHO calls attention to the infections especially by Klebsiella pneumoniae, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and blood poisoning and foodborne diseases, where these infections are becoming harder and sometimes impossible to treat [1]. Antibiotic resistance is mainly due to efflux of antibiotics by transporters, prevention of interaction of antibiotics with target by mutation, modification and protection of target, and modification of antibiotics. These mechanisms result from the inherent structural or functional resistant characteristics, the acquired resistance by mutational change or horizontal gene transfer, and the adaptive antibiotic resistance [2,3,4]. The fact that even before the rediscovery of penicillin resistant bacteria were reported suggests strongly that at least some resistance traits were intrinsically present in their genomes [5,6]. Together with the natural conception that antibiotic-producers should possess the self-resistance mechanisms for the prevention of their suicide, it was hypothesized that the genes for antibiotic modifying enzymes evolved in the antibiotic-producing bacteria and were transferred to pathogenic bacteria through transformation, transduction or conjugation [7,8,9]. This hypothesis has been accepted without dispute until recently [10]. However, the long-time misuse and overuse of antibiotics have resulted in the widespread dissemination of antibiotics as well as antibiotic resistance genes all over the environment, not only in sewage and wastewater treatment plants, hospital effluents, aquaculture, agricultural and slaughterhouse waste, but also in surface waters, soils, and so on. Consequently, multidrug resistance traits have migrated reciprocally among the various bacteria residing in these environments [11,12,13,14]. This review paper summarizes first the antibiotic resistance genes in producing bacteria from the point of view of antibiotic biosynthesis. Then the resistance genes in pathogenic bacteria are compared with those in the producers. Lastly, the relationships of the resistance genes between producing bacteria and pathogenic bacteria are reevaluated again at their amino acid sequence as well as nucleotide sequence levels.