INTRODUCTION Quinones, including benzo-, naphtho-, phenanthra-, and anthraquinones, are widely distributed and play divergent roles in animals, plants, and microorganisms (1, 2). Among quinones, naphthoquinones are especially important as secondary metabolites (SMs) or their precursors in fungi (3). To date, more than 100 naphthoquinones with various structures and physicochemical properties have been identified from more than 60 filamentous fungi (4–6). These compounds display various biological activities such as antibacterial, antifungal, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer activities due to their propensity to inhibit respiration and damage DNA (5, 7). Accordingly, several drugs with a naphthoquinone pharmacophore have been developed and marketed, such as doxorubicin against metastatic cancers, idarubicin against acute myeloid leukemia, mitoxantrone against prostate cancer and multiple sclerosis, and vitamin K against hemorrhagic disease (8, 9). Naphthoquinones have also been considered model compounds to study polyketide biosynthesis in filamentous fungi because of their wide distribution and various bioactivities (6, 10). Unexpectedly, these studies revealed significant differences in naphthoquinone biosynthesis, indicating that the corresponding pathways are polyphyletic (6, 7, 10). Fungi also need to develop self-protection strategies to avoid committing suicide upon the production of bioactive SMs; thus, fungal SM biosynthetic gene clusters routinely encode one or more self-resistance determinants (11–13). Importantly, the genes encoding such self-resistance mechanisms serve as one of the major pools of preexisting antimicrobial resistance for horizontal gene transfer into clinically important microorganisms (12). The same self-resistance determinants also serve as models and predictors for the various mechanisms by which human cells develop resistance to cytotoxic drugs (8, 13). Thus, elucidation of self-resistance mechanisms not only unmasks basic cellular processes in the producing fungi, but also reveals possible avenues of resistance against applied therapeutics (4, 11). Unfortunately, only a few studies have addressed resistance against naphthoquinones. While these studies concentrated on enzymatic degradation by reductases (14), it is still unclear if other naphthoquinone resistance determinants exist in fungi. Recently, we found that 1,4-naphthoquinone-based natural product congeners with antimicrobial activities cooccur with Monascus azaphilone pigments (MonAzPs). MonAzPs have been used extensively as natural food coloring agents for more than two thousand years, and we and others have intensively investigated their biosynthesis in previous studies (15–17). The 1,4-naphthoquinone coproducts, hereinafter called monasones (Monascus naphthoquinones), are detectable only in trace amounts in MonAzP fermentations of wild-type isolates of Monascus spp. (15, 16). However, monasones are produced in substantial amounts by various mutants with gene knockouts in the MonAzP biosynthetic gene cluster (MABGC) (15–17). Nevertheless, the biosynthetic steps that yield these naphthoquinone polyketides and the self-resistance mechanisms of the producer fungus against these antimicrobial products remain uncharacterized (15–17). In this study, we first prove that monasones are bona fide antimicrobial SMs produced by Monascus ruber M7 upon elicitation by competing microorganisms. Then, we elucidate the biosynthesis of monasones and show that the relevant enzymes are encoded within an independently regulated subset of the MABGC. We also show that this subset of genes may endow self-resistance against monasones through detoxification and specific efflux. Our results reveal an unexpected mechanism by which filamentous fungi repurpose pluripotent early SM intermediates and flexible SM biosynthetic enzymes to produce structurally and functionally distinct SMs under different physiological and ecological conditions. We also show that the biosynthesis of these distinct metabolites is encoded in a nested, composite biosynthetic gene supercluster that imparts multilevel synergistic resistance against the potential self-harm caused by these compounds.