INTRODUCTION Throughout history, humanity has been in a constant battle with bacteria causing infectious diseases (1). Especially in the last decades, due to the escalation of multi-drug resistant bacteria, these continuously evolving pathogens have become a serious threat to human health. Consequently, there is an urgent need for novel antibiotics with new modes of action (2,3). Secondary metabolites (SMs) are the key molecules feeding antimicrobial drug development pipelines (4). These so-called natural products, are profusely found and isolated from fungal and bacterial organisms (5). The discovery of natural products has traditionally been centered on bioactivity screening. With the advent of genome sequencing in the last decade or two, in silico methods can now be used to complement these approaches. Presently, genome mining offers a wide range of computational applications that predict the biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) encoding enzymes necessary for the formation of natural products (6,7). Adopting algorithmic architectures like deep learning and hidden markov models, BGC prediction tools such as antiSMASH (8), PRISM (9) or DeepBGC (10), have been used in natural product research for over a decade. As a result of the genome mining efforts, hundreds of thousands of BGCs are continuously deposited in publicly available databases such as antiSMASH-DB (8) and Atlas of Biosynthetic Gene Clusters (IMG-ABC). The total of experimentally verified genome-mined BGCs however, falls even below 1% (11). Since experimental validation of a BGC and its compound is a labour-intensive process (12), a crucial task now is the prioritization of BGCs for further downstream analysis. A recently established technique adopts a BGC prioritization approach leveraging the idea that in order to avoid suicide, bacteria need to be evolved in such a way that they are resistant to the compounds they produce (13). One of the resistance mechanisms bacteria use to protect themselves from their own bioactive compounds is the modification of the antibiotics target (14). In such processes, the duplicated and modified antibiotic target gene can be found within the BGC, providing self resistance (15,16). This so-called target-directed genome mining (TDGM) approach allowed researchers to predict the mode of action of the compounds encoded by uncharacterized BGCs and led to the identification of new natural products (17–19). Since 2017, the Antibiotic Resistant Target Seeker (ARTS) facilitated TDGM approaches in order to prioritize promising strains producing antibiotics with putative novel modes of action by rapidly linking housekeeping and known resistance genes to BGC proximity, duplication and horizontal gene transfer (HGT) events (20,21). By design, the ARTS pipeline functions as a web-server, analyzing user supplied genomes individually with a ‘one job at a time’ mentality which takes a certain processing time. In order to further improve our work on self resistance genome mining, we have developed the ARTS database, a user-friendly web-server for the extensive exploration of the bacterial kingdom using TDGM approaches. The ARTS database provides a global picture of ARTS results interconnected with the whole kingdom of bacteria and provides connections between potential targets and relevant databases containing additional information about respective BGCs or existing drugs. Currently, the ARTS database contains pre-computed ARTS results for a total of 27,096 high quality bacterial genomes obtained from NCBI’s RefSeq database (22), also present in the antiSMASH-DB. Given that there is an ever-increasing usage of metagenomic applications on natural product research, we have also included 43,130 metagenome assembled genomes (MAGs) in the ARTS database described by Nayfach et al. (23). The ARTS database allows researchers to facilitate TDGM based exploration through two main search functions. One of them is the exploration of fundamental ARTS hits such as BGC proximity, duplication and HGT evidence by using a query builder. All of the returned sequences are linked to individual ARTS and antiSMASH results for closer inspection. Second, a target-oriented exploration can be made. Here, the user can search a gene of interest throughout the database, in order to find phylogenetical and statistical information about a potential resistant target with respect to bacterial kingdom.