Introduction Pollination of wild and cultivated flowering plants is an indispensable ecosystem service, which is mainly provided by pollinating insects. Among the insect pollinators, managed honey bee colonies play a particularly important role in agriculture, where they are widely used as commercial pollinators and contribute to 35% of the production volume of global food crops1. In order to secure human food supply, it is therefore important to ensure the health of honey bees, which is continuously threatened by the overuse of insecticides such as neonicotinoid2 in agriculture and also by various viral, bacterial, and fungal pathogens as well as metazoan parasites3. The Gram-positive, facultative anaerobic, spore-forming bacterium, Paenibacillus larvae (P. larvae), is the causative agent of the epizootic American Foulbrood (AFB) of honey bees4. AFB is the most serious bacterial disease of honey bees and is classified as notifiable disease in most countries because it is highly contagious and lethal to entire colonies. Furthermore, most authorities consider the killing of diseased colonies and burning of the hive material the only workable control measure resulting in considerable economic losses in apiculture. AFB is a fatal intestinal infection of the honey bee brood initiated in first instar larvae by ingestion of spore-contaminated food. The distribution of the spores, the infectious form of P. larvae, within a colony and between colonies, also within apiary and between apiaries5, consequently leads to honey bee colony losses. The use of enterobacterial repetitive intergenic consensus (ERIC) sequence primers has revealed four well-described genotypes ERIC I to ERIC IV4 for P. larvae which differ in virulence on the larval6 and colony level7 as well as in pathogenesis strategies employed to kill the host8. The existence of another ERIC genotype, ERIC V, has recently been proposed9. From contemporary outbreaks of AFB all over the world, only P. larvae ERIC I and ERIC II can be isolated10, suggesting that the hypervirulent genotypes ERIC III to ERIC V did not become established in the honey bee population. In our quest to find sustainable control measures against this most serious bacterial disease of honey bees, we started to unravel AFB pathogenesis by analyzing the interaction between P. larvae and honey bee larvae on a molecular level. We identified several virulence factors of P. larvae ERIC I and ERIC II and showed that two AB toxins11,12, a chitin-degrading enzyme13,14 and also an S-layer protein15,16 have a pivotal role in the virulence of this pathogen and that P. larvae also produces various secondary metabolites17. Bacterial secondary metabolites, with polyketides and (non-)ribosomal peptides as important representatives, provide highly valuable lead structures, among them antibiotics with novel modes of action for drug development to fight various infectious diseases18,19. Secondary metabolites can also act as virulence(-like) factors, functioning as signal molecules in gene regulation of defense or growth mechanisms20–22. The search for secondary metabolites produced by P. larvae led to the structural elucidation of paenilamicin that shows cytotoxic, antibacterial and antifungal activities23,24. It is currently assumed that paenilamicin is produced as a defense molecule against microbial competitors, since only P. larvae can usually be isolated as a pure culture from the cadavers of AFB-killed larvae, suggesting that other saprophytic competitors are absent in the degradation process of the larval cadavers to the characteristic ropy mass25. We recently substantiated this view by showing that paenilamicin was active against the bee-associated saprophyte P. alvei in P. larvae-infected larvae23. Paenilamicin is a linear, cationic aminopolyol peptide antibiotic and is synthesized via an unusual nonribosomal peptide synthetase-polyketide synthase (NRPS-PKS) hybrid assembly line that exhibits several fascinating biosynthetic features. It contains unusual structural motifs such as galantinamic acid (Glm), agmatinamic acid (Aga), N-methyldiaminopropionic acid (mDap), galantinic acid (Gla) and a 4,3-spermidine (Spd) at the C-terminus (Fig. 1). P. larvae produces a mixture of paenilamicin variants A1, A2, B1, and B2. They only differ in two positions of the paenilamicin backbone: at the N-terminus and in the center between mDap1 and Gla. Either a lysine (series A) or an arginine (series B) is activated by the adenylation domain of NRPS1 (Fig. 1). The amino acid residue between mDap1 and Gla is a lysine (series 1) or an ornithine (series 2) assigned to be incorporated by NRPS4 (pamD), respectively (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Biosynthetic gene cluster and structure of paenilamicin variants.The paenilamicin (pam) gene cluster23 contains core biosynthetic (red), auxiliary biosynthetic (orange), resistance (pamZ and pamJ; blue) and other (gray) genes and expresses the nonribosomal peptide synthetase-polyketide synthase (NRPS-PKS) hybrid biosynthetic machinery for the production of paenilamicin A1 (Glm, Lys), A2 (Glm, Orn), B1 (Aga, Lys), and B2 (Aga, Orn). Glm - galantinamic acid, Aga - agmatinamic acid, Lys lysine, Orn - ornithine, Ala - alanine, mDap - N-methyldiaminopropionic acid, Gla - galantinic acid, Gly - glycine, Spd - 4,3-spermidine. Fig. 1Biosynthetic gene cluster and structure of paenilamicin variants.The paenilamicin (pam) gene cluster23 contains core biosynthetic (red), auxiliary biosynthetic (orange), resistance (pamZ and pamJ; blue) and other (gray) genes and expresses the nonribosomal peptide synthetase-polyketide synthase (NRPS-PKS) hybrid biosynthetic machinery for the production of paenilamicin A1 (Glm, Lys), A2 (Glm, Orn), B1 (Aga, Lys), and B2 (Aga, Orn). Glm - galantinamic acid, Aga - agmatinamic acid, Lys lysine, Orn - ornithine, Ala - alanine, mDap - N-methyldiaminopropionic acid, Gla - galantinic acid, Gly - glycine, Spd - 4,3-spermidine. Biosynthetic gene cluster and structure of paenilamicin variants. The paenilamicin (pam) gene cluster23 contains core biosynthetic (red), auxiliary biosynthetic (orange), resistance (pamZ and pamJ; blue) and other (gray) genes and expresses the nonribosomal peptide synthetase-polyketide synthase (NRPS-PKS) hybrid biosynthetic machinery for the production of paenilamicin A1 (Glm, Lys), A2 (Glm, Orn), B1 (Aga, Lys), and B2 (Aga, Orn). Glm - galantinamic acid, Aga - agmatinamic acid, Lys lysine, Orn - ornithine, Ala - alanine, mDap - N-methyldiaminopropionic acid, Gla - galantinic acid, Gly - glycine, Spd - 4,3-spermidine. The pam gene cluster harbors a gene encoding the putative acetyl-CoA-dependent N-acetyltransferase PamZ, which belongs to the Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferase (GNAT) superfamily26,27. One prominent member of this superfamily is the bacterial aminoglycoside N-acetyltransferase (AAC) that plays an important role in antibiotic resistances, particularly in clinical and environmental settings28. Aminoglycoside antibiotics have been widely used in the treatment of bacterial infections but they rapidly lose activity against multi-resistant bacteria due to adaptation and the development of resistance. By contrast, self-resistance is an innate, non-adaptation-based mechanism for the protection against self-produced antimicrobial agents. Since self-produced antimicrobial agents could also harm the bacterial host, self-resistance is critical for survival and territorial competition. Our results demonstrate the deactivation of paenilamicins by the regio- and stereoselective self-resistance protein PamZ including its high-resolution crystal structure that shows how its tandem-domain arrangement may organize substrate binding. Together with a parallel study29, in which we report on the total synthesis and the biological evaluation of paenilamicin, we have here unambiguously identified the N-terminal building block of paenilamicins as an essential switch for target binding, biological activity and self-resistance.