Results and discussion Regio- and stereoselective N-acetylation of paenilamicin by PamZ To confirm our hypothesis that PamZ (NCBI WP_023484187) is an acetyl-CoA-dependent N-acetyltransferase that targets paenilamicins, we monitored PamZ-mediated antibacterial effects in vitro by agar diffusion assays against Bacillus megaterium (B. megaterium) as indicator strain as well as by mass spectrometry (MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. To this end, the pamZ gene was amplified from the wild-type (WT) P. larvae ERIC II strain, inserted into the commercial pET28a(+) vector, and transformed into E. coli BL21-Gold(DE3) for heterologous expression. PamZ was then purified (Supplementary Fig. 1) and used for the assays including four native paenilamicin variants as substrates and acetyl-CoA as co-substrate. The paenilamicin variants were purified from P. larvae ERIC I and ERIC II, which preferably produce the paenilamicin mixtures A2/B2 and A1/B1, respectively (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 2). In addition, we also tested synthetic paenilamicin B2 (PamB2_3)29. The agar diffusion assays clearly showed that paenilamicins incubated with PamZ and acetyl-CoA were not able to inhibit the growth of B. megaterium, whereas antibacterial activity was observed in the absence of acetyl-CoA and/or PamZ (Fig. 2). This loss of biological activity correlated with the conversion of paenilamicins to the corresponding N-acetylpaenilamicins as observed by HPLC-ESI-MS. ESI mass spectra revealed that the mass-to-charge ratios of natural and synthetic paenilamicins exhibited a characteristic mass shift of 42 Da indicative of the addition of an acetyl group (Supplementary Figs. 3–7).Fig. 2Deactivation of paenilamicins through PamZ-mediated N-acetylation tested by agar diffusion assay against B. megaterium as the indicator strain.Paenilamicin variants (PamA1, A2, B1, B2) isolated from P. larvae and synthetic paenilamicin B2 (PamB2_3) were incubated in vitro with both acetyl-CoA and PamZ (1), acetyl-CoA only (2), or PamZ only (3). Samples 2 and 3 are negative controls and indicate the lack of bacterial growth. Fig. 2Deactivation of paenilamicins through PamZ-mediated N-acetylation tested by agar diffusion assay against B. megaterium as the indicator strain.Paenilamicin variants (PamA1, A2, B1, B2) isolated from P. larvae and synthetic paenilamicin B2 (PamB2_3) were incubated in vitro with both acetyl-CoA and PamZ (1), acetyl-CoA only (2), or PamZ only (3). Samples 2 and 3 are negative controls and indicate the lack of bacterial growth. Deactivation of paenilamicins through PamZ-mediated N-acetylation tested by agar diffusion assay against B. megaterium as the indicator strain. Paenilamicin variants (PamA1, A2, B1, B2) isolated from P. larvae and synthetic paenilamicin B2 (PamB2_3) were incubated in vitro with both acetyl-CoA and PamZ (1), acetyl-CoA only (2), or PamZ only (3). Samples 2 and 3 are negative controls and indicate the lack of bacterial growth. Paenilamicin contains several primary and secondary amino groups that are potential candidates for N-acetylation. To determine the site of acetylation, we monitored PamZ-mediated effects in fingerprint tandem MS and NMR spectra of paenilamicin before and after treatment with PamZ/acetyl-CoA. Besides the mass shift of 42 Da for the acetylation, characteristic MS2 fragmentation patterns originated from the difference between Glm and Aga residues in series A and B (+28 Da) as well as the difference between Lys and Orn residues in series 1 and 2 (+14 Da). MS2 fragmentation mainly resulted in fragment ions b4, y4 and y6 of each paenilamicin and N-acetylpaenilamicin variant acquired by collision-induced dissociation (Supplementary Table 1). Fragment ion b4 varied depending on the paenilamicin series showing mass shifts of 14 Da and 28 Da. Importantly, we observed a mass shift of 42 Da only for fragment ion b4, indicating acetylation in the N-terminal half of paenilamicin. By contrast, the fragment ions y4 and y6 did not exhibit any mass shifts of 42 Da between paenilamicins and N-acetylpaenilamicins. Thus, we excluded acetylation in the C-terminal half of paenilamicin (Supplementary Figs. 8–18). In addition, we detected and isolated small amounts of N-acetylpaenilamicin A1, B1, and B2 from supernatants of P. larvae ERIC I and ERIC II (Supplementary Fig. 19), and compared them with our products formed in vitro. The MS2 fragmentation analysis confirmed that the mono-acetylation in the N-terminal half of paenilamicin also occurred in vivo (Supplementary Figs. 20–22). The MS2 experiments did not reveal whether the N-terminal amino group of Aga/Glm or its side chain (amino/guanidino group) was acetylated. To ultimately identify the functional group that is modified by PamZ, we acquired 1H-13C hetero-nuclear single-quantum coherence (HSQC) NMR spectra of paenilamicin B2 before and after incubation with PamZ/acetyl-CoA. Although both spectra were mostly superimposable, severe chemical shift perturbations (CSPs) were observed for a minor fraction of cross-peaks (Fig. 3a). Mapping CSPs onto the structure of paenilamicin B2 revealed a well-defined region comprising the N-terminal half, with the strongest effect being located at position 6 of Aga (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Table 2). N-acetylpaenilamicin B2 also showed an additional cross-peak compared to paenilamicin B2, which we tentatively assigned to the methyl moiety of the newly attached acetyl group (Fig. 3a). Our data unequivocally demonstrated that PamZ mono-N-acetylates the N-terminal amino group at Aga-6 position of paenilamicin and thereby abolishes its antibacterial activity. Ultimately, this result is further supported by two synthetic diastereomers of paenilamicin B2 with l- instead of the native d-configuration at Aga-6 (PamB2_1 and PamB2_2), that were both antibacterially less active29 and that were not modified by PamZ (Fig. 4 and Supplementary Fig. 23).Fig. 3Identification of the N-acetylation site through 2D NMR spectroscopy.a Overlay of relevant 1H-13C HSQC sections of paenilamicin B2 (black) and N-acetylpaenilamicin B2 (blue). Strongly perturbed cross-peaks are highlighted with red labels. Known impurities are labeled with one, two and three asterisks arising from glycerol, acetic acid and residual purification traces of paenilamicin B1, respectively. The numbers (in backbone) and Greek letters (in amino acid residues) refer to atom positions in the corresponding building blocks as labeled in b. b Significant chemical shift perturbations (CSPs) and corresponding positions are indicated as circles in the chemical structure of N-acetylpaenilamicin B2 (see legend for color code). Aga - agmatinamic acid, Ala - alanine, mDap - N-methyldiaminopropionic acid, Orn - ornithine, Gla - galantinic acid, Gly - glycine, Spd - 4,3-spermidine, Ac - acetyl group.Fig. 4Substrate specificity and stereoselectivity of PamZ.The natural product (PamB2), synthetic paenilamicin B2 (PamB2_3) and synthetic diastereomers of paenilamicin B2 (PamB2_2, PamB2_1) were incubated with PamZ and acetyl-CoA in vitro and tested in an agar diffusion assay against Bacillus megaterium (insets). From the chemical structure of paenilamicins, only the agmatinamic and galantinic acid are depicted to emphasize the changes in stereoconfiguration highlighted in purple and circles. Each single reaction was verified by HPLC-ESI-MS. Dashed lines indicate the mass shift of 42 Da (4 × 10.5 Da) due to N-acetylation. Fig. 3Identification of the N-acetylation site through 2D NMR spectroscopy.a Overlay of relevant 1H-13C HSQC sections of paenilamicin B2 (black) and N-acetylpaenilamicin B2 (blue). Strongly perturbed cross-peaks are highlighted with red labels. Known impurities are labeled with one, two and three asterisks arising from glycerol, acetic acid and residual purification traces of paenilamicin B1, respectively. The numbers (in backbone) and Greek letters (in amino acid residues) refer to atom positions in the corresponding building blocks as labeled in b. b Significant chemical shift perturbations (CSPs) and corresponding positions are indicated as circles in the chemical structure of N-acetylpaenilamicin B2 (see legend for color code). Aga - agmatinamic acid, Ala - alanine, mDap - N-methyldiaminopropionic acid, Orn - ornithine, Gla - galantinic acid, Gly - glycine, Spd - 4,3-spermidine, Ac - acetyl group. Identification of the N-acetylation site through 2D NMR spectroscopy. a Overlay of relevant 1H-13C HSQC sections of paenilamicin B2 (black) and N-acetylpaenilamicin B2 (blue). Strongly perturbed cross-peaks are highlighted with red labels. Known impurities are labeled with one, two and three asterisks arising from glycerol, acetic acid and residual purification traces of paenilamicin B1, respectively. The numbers (in backbone) and Greek letters (in amino acid residues) refer to atom positions in the corresponding building blocks as labeled in b. b Significant chemical shift perturbations (CSPs) and corresponding positions are indicated as circles in the chemical structure of N-acetylpaenilamicin B2 (see legend for color code). Aga - agmatinamic acid, Ala - alanine, mDap - N-methyldiaminopropionic acid, Orn - ornithine, Gla - galantinic acid, Gly - glycine, Spd - 4,3-spermidine, Ac - acetyl group. Fig. 4Substrate specificity and stereoselectivity of PamZ.The natural product (PamB2), synthetic paenilamicin B2 (PamB2_3) and synthetic diastereomers of paenilamicin B2 (PamB2_2, PamB2_1) were incubated with PamZ and acetyl-CoA in vitro and tested in an agar diffusion assay against Bacillus megaterium (insets). From the chemical structure of paenilamicins, only the agmatinamic and galantinic acid are depicted to emphasize the changes in stereoconfiguration highlighted in purple and circles. Each single reaction was verified by HPLC-ESI-MS. Dashed lines indicate the mass shift of 42 Da (4 × 10.5 Da) due to N-acetylation. Substrate specificity and stereoselectivity of PamZ. The natural product (PamB2), synthetic paenilamicin B2 (PamB2_3) and synthetic diastereomers of paenilamicin B2 (PamB2_2, PamB2_1) were incubated with PamZ and acetyl-CoA in vitro and tested in an agar diffusion assay against Bacillus megaterium (insets). From the chemical structure of paenilamicins, only the agmatinamic and galantinic acid are depicted to emphasize the changes in stereoconfiguration highlighted in purple and circles. Each single reaction was verified by HPLC-ESI-MS. Dashed lines indicate the mass shift of 42 Da (4 × 10.5 Da) due to N-acetylation. The structure of PamZ:acetyl-CoA binary complex A BLAST30 search indicated that PamZ belongs to the GNAT superfamily with a sequence identity of 31% to the N-acetyltransferase, ZmaR, whose structure has not yet been determined and which confers resistance against the aminopolyol peptide antibiotic, zwittermicin A, in Bacillus cereus UW85 (Supplementary Fig. 24)31. We solved the crystal structure of PamZ in complex with acetyl-CoA at a resolution of 1.34 Å by using the uncharacterized N-acetyltransferase from Streptococcus suis 89/1591 (PDB 3G3S) for molecular replacement (Supplementary Table 3). The electron density was of excellent quality, allowed the modeling of the entire polypeptide chain, and unambiguously revealed the bound acetyl-CoA (Supplementary Fig. 25). PamZ comprises an N-terminal domain (NTD, residues 1–128, secondary structure elements indicated by primes) and a C-terminal domain (CTD, residues 140–275), which both adopt the characteristic GNAT fold (Fig. 5a)32. The two tandem-GNAT domains, that may have originated from a gene duplication event, share low sequence identity (<20%) and are connected by an α-helical linker (αbridge, residues 129–139). The overall fold of each domain is very similar to that of bacterial aminoglycoside N-acetyltransferases (AACs), as pairwise structural alignments with several AACs (PDB 1BO4, 1M4I, 1S3Z) gave root-mean-square deviations (RMSDs) of 2.9–4.2 Å for both the NTD and CTD (Supplementary Fig. 26)33. A structural superposition of the NTD and CTD of PamZ yielded an RMSD of 4.2 Å for 75 pairs of Cα atoms (Supplementary Fig. 27)33.Fig. 5X-ray crystal structure of Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferase PamZ.a Structural topology of PamZ with its characteristic tandem-GNAT fold. The protein structure is divided into an N-terminal (NTD) and a C-terminal (CTD) domain. Color coding of protein regions follows that of other bacterial GNATs, such as aminoglycoside N-acetyltransferases (AACs)32. b Cartoon representations of PamZ from two perspectives. The first perspective (left) follows the color code as in panel a. Acetyl-CoA (AcCoA) bound to the P-loop and β-bulge of the CTD is depicted as sticks. The β-bulge is formed by strands β4b and β5. The tandem-GNAT domains are highlighted (right) in blue (NTD) and purple (CTD). Secondary structure elements are labeled according to the protein topology. c Identical view as in panel b with the electrostatic potential mapped on the surface of PamZ, illustrating positive (blue) and negative (red) charges. The acetyl group attached to CoA (sticks) points into the active site highlighted by an asterisk. GNAT is an abbreviation of Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferase (Gcn5: general control non-repressed protein 5). Fig. 5X-ray crystal structure of Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferase PamZ.a Structural topology of PamZ with its characteristic tandem-GNAT fold. The protein structure is divided into an N-terminal (NTD) and a C-terminal (CTD) domain. Color coding of protein regions follows that of other bacterial GNATs, such as aminoglycoside N-acetyltransferases (AACs)32. b Cartoon representations of PamZ from two perspectives. The first perspective (left) follows the color code as in panel a. Acetyl-CoA (AcCoA) bound to the P-loop and β-bulge of the CTD is depicted as sticks. The β-bulge is formed by strands β4b and β5. The tandem-GNAT domains are highlighted (right) in blue (NTD) and purple (CTD). Secondary structure elements are labeled according to the protein topology. c Identical view as in panel b with the electrostatic potential mapped on the surface of PamZ, illustrating positive (blue) and negative (red) charges. The acetyl group attached to CoA (sticks) points into the active site highlighted by an asterisk. GNAT is an abbreviation of Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferase (Gcn5: general control non-repressed protein 5). X-ray crystal structure of Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferase PamZ. a Structural topology of PamZ with its characteristic tandem-GNAT fold. The protein structure is divided into an N-terminal (NTD) and a C-terminal (CTD) domain. Color coding of protein regions follows that of other bacterial GNATs, such as aminoglycoside N-acetyltransferases (AACs)32. b Cartoon representations of PamZ from two perspectives. The first perspective (left) follows the color code as in panel a. Acetyl-CoA (AcCoA) bound to the P-loop and β-bulge of the CTD is depicted as sticks. The β-bulge is formed by strands β4b and β5. The tandem-GNAT domains are highlighted (right) in blue (NTD) and purple (CTD). Secondary structure elements are labeled according to the protein topology. c Identical view as in panel b with the electrostatic potential mapped on the surface of PamZ, illustrating positive (blue) and negative (red) charges. The acetyl group attached to CoA (sticks) points into the active site highlighted by an asterisk. GNAT is an abbreviation of Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferase (Gcn5: general control non-repressed protein 5). However, a comparison with the typical GNAT fold revealed several unique features in PamZ. Instead of two N-terminal α-helices, α1 and α2, both domains of PamZ contain three short helical segments, α0-α1-α2 (α0’–α1’–α2’), which pack onto one face of the central antiparallel β-sheet, β2–β3–β4 (β2’–β3’–β4’), whereas helix α3 (α3’) buries its other side. A kink in the backbone conformation of strand β3, involving residues T199 and C200, causes a strong right twist and thus a distortion of the antiparallel β3–β4 arrangement, which led us to discriminate these strands as β3a/β3b and β4a/β4b (Fig. 5a). The central β-sheet is extended by strand β5’ in the NTD, whereas the CTD shows the characteristic β-bulge of GNAT enzymes — a V-shaped cavity between strands β4b and β5 accommodates the pantetheine segment of CoA (Fig. 6a). Furthermore, the well-conserved pyrophosphate-binding loop (P-loop) of the GNAT family (R/Q-X-X-G-X-A/G)26 is only present in the CTD of PamZ (Q-N-K-G-L-A) between strand β4b and helix α3 (Fig. 6a)34, whereas the NTD is missing this signature motif. Accordingly, there is only one acetyl-CoA molecule canonically bound in the PamZ structure, namely to the CTD.Fig. 6Active site of PamZ.a Motifs A (β4–α3) and B (β5–α4) located in the C-terminal domain (CTD) interact with co-substrate acetyl-CoA. b Close-up view of the active site displaying the negatively charged groove (color code as in Fig. 5c). c Highlighted amino acid residues with hydrogen-donating and -accepting groups form the groove and are well-positioned to potentially interact with the substrate paenilamicin. Fig. 6Active site of PamZ.a Motifs A (β4–α3) and B (β5–α4) located in the C-terminal domain (CTD) interact with co-substrate acetyl-CoA. b Close-up view of the active site displaying the negatively charged groove (color code as in Fig. 5c). c Highlighted amino acid residues with hydrogen-donating and -accepting groups form the groove and are well-positioned to potentially interact with the substrate paenilamicin. Active site of PamZ. a Motifs A (β4–α3) and B (β5–α4) located in the C-terminal domain (CTD) interact with co-substrate acetyl-CoA. b Close-up view of the active site displaying the negatively charged groove (color code as in Fig. 5c). c Highlighted amino acid residues with hydrogen-donating and -accepting groups form the groove and are well-positioned to potentially interact with the substrate paenilamicin. Hence, we concluded that the NTD is incompetent in binding acetyl-CoA and rather plays a structural role, in particular for substrate binding (see below). Notably, many GNAT enzymes exist as homodimers in solution with various arrangements of the monomer-monomer interface32. Likewise, AACs have often been crystallographically observed in a homodimeric state, although their quaternary structure in solution may vary35. PamZ exists as a monomer, both in solution and in the crystal (Supplementary Fig. 28). However, the tandem-GNAT domain constellation of PamZ achieves an intramolecular domain-domain interface that resembles that of some GNAT homodimers. There are several GNAT enzymes that utilize domain swapping of strand β6 to stabilize their homodimeric structure34,36,37. Interestingly, a major interface in PamZ is achieved by domain swapping of strand β6 (β6’), which inserts between strands β5’ and β6’ (β5 and β6) of the opposing domain and thus forms an extended, antiparallel, and strongly-twisted β-sheet throughout the enzyme (Fig. 5b). This β-sheet is only interrupted by the β-bulge in the CTD accommodating the cofactor and allowing the amide groups of its pantetheine portion to form pseudo-β-sheet hydrogen bonds to strand β4b (Fig. 6a). A very similar tandem arrangement of a pseudo-GNAT NTD and a canonical GNAT CTD can be found in the template protein (PDB 3G3S). Another example is the structure of mycothiol synthase MshD from Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which is also organized as a tandem repeat of two GNAT domains with a catalytically inactive NTD38. PamZ appears to utilize its NTD to form a well-defined substrate pocket with strands β5 and β6’ representing its floor. A second interface between the NTD and CTD is accomplished through tight packing of helix α2’ onto the small β3b–β4a sheet. Further interactions involve helix α2 of the CTD and the loops between α2’ and β2’ as well as β3’ and β4’ of the NTD. These inter-domain contacts fully cover the central groove that is normally found at the interface of homodimeric structures of GNAT enzymes and restrict substrate entry to the opening that is also used by the cofactor. This remaining cleft between the two domains of PamZ is decorated with several acidic residues (e.g. E89, E116, E118, D120, D162, D170, D215, E216, E217, E218, E272, E274, and the C-terminus) and thus deploys a large negatively charged surface to attract its polycationic substrate (Fig. 5c). A corridor that lies aside and beyond the acetyl group of the cofactor is approximately 7–8 Å deep and 8–9 Å wide with respect to the thioester carbonyl atom. Although we did not obtain crystals of a ternary PamZ-acetyl-CoA-paenilamicin complex, the position of acetyl-CoA, the well-defined shape of the neighboring pocket and our knowledge about the substrate’s N-terminal acetylation site allows us to predict that the Glm/Aga side chain of paenilamicin very likely penetrates into this pocket. Acidic residues D25 (loop between α1’ and α2’), E122 (β6’), and E208 (β4a) are well-positioned within the pocket to accommodate and stabilize the guanidine group of Aga, as well as to tolerate the Nζ amine of Glm. Other residues that shape the substrate pocket include T58/T59 (loop between β3’ and β4’), T98 (β5’) and Y124 (β6’) of the NTD as well as C200/Y201 (β3b) and S245/F247 (β5) of the CTD (Fig. 6c). This shows that both domains most likely contribute to substrate recognition. Moreover, the structure of PamZ explains its regioselectivity: if PamZ was to modify e.g. the terminal amino group of spermidine in paenilamicin, the enzyme would not require such a deep substrate-binding pocket. The architecture of the central groove between the NTD and CTD has evolved to optimally accommodate the N-terminal Glm/Aga building block of paenilamicin, whilst terminal amines such as those of spermidine, ornithine and lysine side chains would not occupy this binding pocket, as they would experience significantly less binding stabilization. Such accommodation of Glm/Aga in the substrate pocket would position the N-terminal amino group of Aga-6 close to the thioester carbonyl of the cofactor. An active site aspartate or glutamate residue commonly acts as a general base to trigger the N-acetylation reaction by deprotonation of the amine followed by a nucleophilic attack at the carbonyl of the thioester35. In PamZ, the side chains of E122 (β6’) as well as E208 (β4a) exhibit an interatomic distance of ~7 Å to the carbonyl atom of acetyl-CoA and thus might be in close proximity to the N-terminal amino group of Aga-6 (Fig. 6c). Residue S245 (β5) is sandwiched between E122 and E208, and may mediate deprotonation and/or proton shuttling. Furthermore, we cannot exclude the involvement of water molecules during proton transfer. An oxyanion hole as described for myristoyl-CoA transferase39 is not present in PamZ, but the amide proton of V211 (β4b) facilitates hydrogen bonding to the carbonyl oxygen of the thioester, which would increase the electrophilicity of the carbonyl carbon and stabilize the tetrahedral transition state after nucleophilic attack. Self-resistance mechanism of P. larvae The deactivation of paenilamicin through formation of N-acetylpaenilamicin by the action of PamZ (Supplementary Figs. 3–7) implicates that the enzyme may confer self-resistance to the producer strain P. larvae. To test this hypothesis, we exposed the deletion mutant P. larvae ∆pamZ to a mixture of paenilamicin A1/B1 in an agar diffusion assay. The mixture, which was purified from P. larvae ERIC II, inhibited bacterial growth of the deletion mutant ∆pamZ, but not that of the WT strain (Fig. 7a).Fig. 7Self-resistance of P. larvae against paenilamicin.a Deactivation of a paenilamicin mixture A1/B1 (left) was tested by an agar diffusion assay against P. larvae WT (top) and P. larvae ∆pamZ (bottom). The negative control (right) contained water only. b HPLC-ESI-MS spectra of cell lysates of P. larvae WT (top) and P. larvae ∆pamZ (bottom) are depicted. Relevant peaks for paenilamicin (A1/B1) and N-acetylpaenilamicin (Ac-A1/Ac-B1) species are labeled with corresponding m/z ratios (z = 4). WT - wild-type. Fig. 7Self-resistance of P. larvae against paenilamicin.a Deactivation of a paenilamicin mixture A1/B1 (left) was tested by an agar diffusion assay against P. larvae WT (top) and P. larvae ∆pamZ (bottom). The negative control (right) contained water only. b HPLC-ESI-MS spectra of cell lysates of P. larvae WT (top) and P. larvae ∆pamZ (bottom) are depicted. Relevant peaks for paenilamicin (A1/B1) and N-acetylpaenilamicin (Ac-A1/Ac-B1) species are labeled with corresponding m/z ratios (z = 4). WT - wild-type. Self-resistance of P. larvae against paenilamicin. a Deactivation of a paenilamicin mixture A1/B1 (left) was tested by an agar diffusion assay against P. larvae WT (top) and P. larvae ∆pamZ (bottom). The negative control (right) contained water only. b HPLC-ESI-MS spectra of cell lysates of P. larvae WT (top) and P. larvae ∆pamZ (bottom) are depicted. Relevant peaks for paenilamicin (A1/B1) and N-acetylpaenilamicin (Ac-A1/Ac-B1) species are labeled with corresponding m/z ratios (z = 4). WT - wild-type. This result demonstrated that P. larvae requires the resistance gene, pamZ, to protect itself from the deleterious effects of its own antibacterial agent, paenilamicin. For further experimental support, we analyzed supernatants and cell pellets of P. larvae WT and ∆pamZ for paenilamicins and N-acetylpaenilamicins. In cell lysates of P. larvae WT, we exclusively found N-acetylpaenilamicin, whereas for the deletion mutant ∆pamZ only unmodified paenilamicin (Fig. 7b) was detected. From paenilamicin isolates of the WT strain, primarily paenilamicin and only small amounts of N-acetylpaenilamicin were found in the supernatant by HPLC-ESI-MS (Supplementary Fig. 2). These findings demonstrate that the self-resistance factor PamZ enables P. larvae WT to acetylate and thus inactivate intracellular paenilamicin. N-acetylation functions as an efficient self-protection mechanism by scavenging paenilamicin that reenters the cells of P. larvae. However, this mechanism may not apply to intracellular paenilamicin after its release from the NRPS-PKS assembly line. Instead, it seems very likely that an inactive precursor, i.e. a prodrug, of paenilamicin is produced to mask the strong antibacterial activity before cellular export. Along these lines, the biosynthetic gene cluster of paenilamicin23 harbors the pamJ gene, which shows significant sequence similarity to a cyclic-peptide export ABC transporter with d-asparagine-specific peptidase activity that has been reported to be involved in a prodrug resistance mechanism in nonribosomal peptide synthesis40–43. The peptidase recognizes and cleaves an N-acyl-d-asparagine unit of the prodrug. Accordingly, P. larvae must have developed a dual self-resistance mechanism against paenilamicin both potentially addressing the N-terminal Glm/Aga residue, specifically the N-terminal amino group at Aga-6 position, as modification site. Not only P. larvae, but also other bacteria belonging to the Firmicutes refer to a dual self-resistance mechanism associated with NRPS-PKS-derived compounds like amicoumacin42,44, zwittermicin31, and edeine45 (Supplementary Fig. 29). In a very recent study, paenilamicin B2 showed an inhibitory effect (IC50 of ~0.3 µM) on the E. coli ribosome in vitro, whereas the non-native diastereomer PamB2_2 was approximately tenfold and the N-acetylpaenilamicin B2 approximately 100-fold less active29. The modifications of the N-terminal amino group at Aga-6 thus point to the importance of the N-terminal Glm/Aga residue as a major pharmacophore mediating recognition at the molecular target. The insights into the pharmacophore region of paenilamicins and the structure of PamZ including its substrate-binding pocket may lead to the development of inhibitors against the self-resistance factor to weaken the bee larvae pathogen. This study lays an appreciable foundation to understand the self-resistance mechanisms of P. larvae and to screen for potential small molecule inhibitors that target the active site of PamZ and compete with the naturally occurring paenilamicin. Consequently, the inhibitors would disable the self-resistance of P. larvae to paenilamicin resulting in the suicide of the bacterial pathogen for the benefit of the honey bee larvae. Such an anti-virulence strategy has the advantage that it circumvents the direct selection pressure on P. larvae to produce resistant strains because it only disarms the bacterium instead of interfering in essential bacterial functions. Therefore, it is not expected that inhibiting PamZ will readily lead to the development of resistant strains, as has already happened with the classical antibiotic treatment of AFB46. Assuming that the potential candidate has been confirmed in lab-scale applications, it could be applied in honey bee colonies by preventively impregnating the brood comb wax foundations with the substance so that it is dissolved in the brood food and then ingested by the larvae during early larval stages when P. larvae poses the most serious threat. Certainly, finding a small molecule inhibitor for PamZ and optimizing its application have to be further investigated in future studies. In summary, these results expand our knowledge of the molecular strategies exploited by P. larvae to survive in its ecological niche — knowledge that is needed to combat this pathogen and secure the health of bee colonies worldwide.