RESULTS YQL and AZL proteins in Streptomyces are evolutionarily distinct. E. coli YcaQ and S. sahachiroi AlkZ are the only characterized members of the HTH_42 superfamily and are unique in their ability to unhook ICLs and to provide cellular resistance to cross-linking agents. Both enzymes fully unhook ICLs derived from AZB (Fig. 1A). While AlkZ is specific for AZB-ICLs and is essential to the AZB-producing organism, YcaQ unhooks a broader range of ICLs, including those derived from the simple bifunctional alkylating agent mechlorethamine (Fig. 1B), and displays robust excision activity for N7-methylguanine (7mG) monoadducts (28, 30, 31). YcaQ and AlkZ belong to one of five classes of HTH_42 proteins characterized by domain organization, which accounts for >95% of all HTH_42 proteins (see Fig. S1A in the supplemental material). Approximately two-thirds of the known HTH_42 proteins in prokaryotes are found in Actinobacteria, with ∼25% of those sequences from Streptomycetales (Fig. S1B and C). The remainder are found in several different orders of Bacteria and a very small number (12) in Archaea. FIG 1Phylogenetic organization of YQL/AZL proteins in Streptomyces. (A) Azinomycin B reacts with opposite strands of DNA to form an ICL, which is unhooked by AlkZ. (B) Structure of a nitrogen mustard ICL derived from mechlorethamine and unhooked by E. coli YcaQ. (C) Phylogenetic tree of YcaQ-like (YQL, blue) and AlkZ-like (AZL, red/orange; AZL2, gray) Streptomyces proteins (n = 897). The red and orange AZL clades distinguish HΦQ and QΦQ catalytic motifs. E. coli YcaQ and S. sahachiroi AlkZ proteins are labeled. (D) Sequence logos for the catalytic motifs in YQL, AZL, and AZL2 proteins. Catalytic residues are marked with asterisks. Colors correspond to side chain chemistry. (E) Copy number frequency per Streptomyces genome as a percentage of the total species analyzed (n = 436 species, 897 sequences). One-way ANOVA significance (P) values of copy number variance are 0.0078 (YQL-AZL), 0.0033 (AZL-AZL2), and 0.3305 (YQL-AZL2), the latter of which is not significant. (F) YQL/AZL coincidence frequency. The blue-shaded section represents species containing both subfamilies; the tan-shaded section represents species containing either YQL or AZL. Phylogenetic organization of YQL/AZL proteins in Streptomyces. (A) Azinomycin B reacts with opposite strands of DNA to form an ICL, which is unhooked by AlkZ. (B) Structure of a nitrogen mustard ICL derived from mechlorethamine and unhooked by E. coli YcaQ. (C) Phylogenetic tree of YcaQ-like (YQL, blue) and AlkZ-like (AZL, red/orange; AZL2, gray) Streptomyces proteins (n = 897). The red and orange AZL clades distinguish HΦQ and QΦQ catalytic motifs. E. coli YcaQ and S. sahachiroi AlkZ proteins are labeled. (D) Sequence logos for the catalytic motifs in YQL, AZL, and AZL2 proteins. Catalytic residues are marked with asterisks. Colors correspond to side chain chemistry. (E) Copy number frequency per Streptomyces genome as a percentage of the total species analyzed (n = 436 species, 897 sequences). One-way ANOVA significance (P) values of copy number variance are 0.0078 (YQL-AZL), 0.0033 (AZL-AZL2), and 0.3305 (YQL-AZL2), the latter of which is not significant. (F) YQL/AZL coincidence frequency. The blue-shaded section represents species containing both subfamilies; the tan-shaded section represents species containing either YQL or AZL. HTH_42 superfamily taxonomy, phylogeny, and copy number analysis. (A) Domain schematics for top 5 Pfam classes of HTH_42 superfamily proteins. Number of sequences for each organization is labeled to the right, along with the domain key. Dark vertical lines represent predicted unstructured regions. (B) Taxonomic distribution of HTH_42 proteins from prokaryotes (class, 4,797 sequences). (C) Taxonomic distribution of HTH_42 proteins from Actinobacteria (order, 3,033 sequences). (D) Sequence alignment of YcaQ-like (YQL, blue), AlkZ-like (AZL, red; AZL2, yellow) proteins in the region surrounding the catalytic motif (asterisks). E. coli YcaQ and S. sahachiroi AlkZ are shown at the top of each block as a reference. (E) Denaturing PAGE of 5′-Cy5 labeled d7mG-DNA substrate (S) and nicked AP-DNA product (P) after treatment with either buffer (mock), E. coli YcaQ, S. sahachiroi AlkZ, or Streptomyces caeruleatus AZL2. AP-DNA resulting from glycosylase activity was treated with 0.2 M NaOH to generate β,δ-elimination products, which are quantified below the gel. Download FIG S1, EPS file, 1.1 MB. To better understand the evolutionary and phylogenetic breadth of this superfamily in Streptomyces, we collected and analyzed all HTH_42 protein sequences from available genomes using a combination of BLAST searches against Streptomyces genomes in GenBank and HHMR protein domain searches of the BLAST hits against the Pfam database (Table S1). Alignment of the 897 sequences showed that YQL and AZL proteins fall into distinct clades that represent 49% and 43% of the total number of sequences, respectively (Fig. 1C). The clades are defined in part by unique catalytic motifs QΦD (YQL) and (Q/H)ΦQ (AZL), where Φ is an aliphatic residue (30, 31). YQL proteins show a high degree (>75%) of amino acid sequence conservation, whereas the AZL subfamily is more diverse, with only ∼40% amino acid similarity on average. The differences in conservation are consistent with mutation rates as approximated by tip-to-root branch lengths (0.23 for YQL and 0.59 for AZL). In addition, we found that 8% of sequences do not fall into either YQL or AZL clades and contain a unique catalytic consensus sequence, HΦ(S/T)(D/E) (Fig. 1C and D). Because these sequences exhibit greater sequence similarity overall to AZL than YQL, we refer to this third homolog as AZL2. Interestingly, AZL2 is more similar to YQL in its copy number and genomic location (see below) and, thus, is somewhat of a hybrid between AZL and YQL. We verified that proteins within the AZL2 clade contain bona fide DNA glycosylase activity, as the S. caeruleatus AZL2 protein excised 7mG from DNA in a manner similar to that of S. sahachiroi AlkZ (Fig. S1E). List of HTH_42 proteins by organism. List of all Streptomyces YQL (YcaQ-like), AZL (AlkZ-like), or AZL2 (AlkZ-like 2) proteins in this study, along with the GenBank/RefSeq genome/assembly ID for each organism. Homologs are alphabetized by organism. Download Table S1, XLSX file, 0.04 MB. Another striking difference between the YQL and AZL families is that AZL genes are often found in multiple copies and in different combinations in many species of Streptomyces. The copy number differences between the different clades are significant, with the majority (90 to 95%) of YQL and AZL2 homologs found as a single copy and AZL mainly found in multiple (2–5) copies (Fig. 1E). The coincidence of YQL and AZL also varies. Although the most common combination is the presence of a copy of each YQL and AZL, many other combinations are observed (Fig. 1F). The number of species that contain both genes decreases as the copy number increases. For species containing either YQL or AZL (not both), the majority contain a single YQL copy, with just a few species having only AZL present. These results show that both YQL and AZL proteins are broadly distributed across Streptomyces and are distinct with respect to sequence, diversity, and copy number. AZL proteins are prevalent in biosynthetic gene clusters. Given the distinct phylogeny of YQL and AZL proteins, we next examined their proximity to BGCs and characterized the identities of clusters containing a putative homolog. To perform this analysis, we identified all BGCs in the genomes of known Streptomyces species containing an HTH_42 protein, determined the most similar known cluster via BLAST, and extracted the distance in base pairs between the YQL/AZL gene and the nearest 3′ or 5′ end of each BGC (Fig. 2A and Table S2). Strikingly, none of the 442 YQL genes localize to within 20 kb of the most proximal gene cluster in that organism (Fig. 2B). In contrast, AZL genes are primarily found inside or in close genomic proximity to clusters, with an average distance of roughly 2.3 kb from the nearest BGC (compared to 25 kb for YQL). Despite their sequence similarity to AZLs, the AZL2 proteins are more like YQL in that they also are not observed within 20 kb of a BGC (Table S2). FIG 2Streptomyces AZL proteins are found in diverse uncharacterized biosynthetic gene clusters. (A) Schematic depicting the workflow for identification of HTH_42 homologs in uncharacterized Streptomyces BGCs. Homologs were identified through the presence of the catalytic motif (red text in sequence alignment). The amino acid numbering is in relation to S. sahachiroi AlkZ. The corresponding Streptomyces genomes were input into antiSMASH, from which genomic distances between YQL/AZL and the nearest BGC as well as homologous clusters were extracted. (B) Violin plot showing the distribution of distances of YQL (n = 167) and AZL (n = 154) genes to the nearest BGC (in kbp; ±100 kb). The dotted line at 0 kb represents the 5′ (+)/3′ (−) termini of the nearest BGC. Thick and thin dashed lines within the plot represent the median and upper/lower quartiles, respectively. The chi-square significance (P) value between YQL and AZL data is less than 0.0001. (C) Frequency of various types of BGCs in which AZL genes were found (n = 68 clusters identified). The y axis denotes the natural product/scaffold type to which that cluster is most homologous. Black bars represent known DNA alkylators or DNA interacting metabolites, and hashed bars represent potential DNA-damaging metabolites. Lowercase letters to the right of the bars correspond to structures shown in panel D. (D) Representative compounds corresponding to BGC types in panel C. Potential reactive sites are colored red. LL-D4919α1 and hedamycin structures are shown in Fig. 3. (E and F) Nearest-neighbor analysis of AZL (E) and YQL (F). (E) Nearest genes to AZL proteins found inside and outside clusters, shown as the ratio of GO terms inside and outside and grouped by function (blue, metabolic; green, cell signaling and function; orange, genome maintenance). (F) Representative example from Streptomyces griseoviridis of nearest neighbor analysis for YQL proteins. Genes are colored according to function as in panel E (gray, unknown/hypothetical gene). These genes are invariant for all YQL proteins, with the exception of the outermost genes, in which only one instance of variance was observed. Streptomyces AZL proteins are found in diverse uncharacterized biosynthetic gene clusters. (A) Schematic depicting the workflow for identification of HTH_42 homologs in uncharacterized Streptomyces BGCs. Homologs were identified through the presence of the catalytic motif (red text in sequence alignment). The amino acid numbering is in relation to S. sahachiroi AlkZ. The corresponding Streptomyces genomes were input into antiSMASH, from which genomic distances between YQL/AZL and the nearest BGC as well as homologous clusters were extracted. (B) Violin plot showing the distribution of distances of YQL (n = 167) and AZL (n = 154) genes to the nearest BGC (in kbp; ±100 kb). The dotted line at 0 kb represents the 5′ (+)/3′ (−) termini of the nearest BGC. Thick and thin dashed lines within the plot represent the median and upper/lower quartiles, respectively. The chi-square significance (P) value between YQL and AZL data is less than 0.0001. (C) Frequency of various types of BGCs in which AZL genes were found (n = 68 clusters identified). The y axis denotes the natural product/scaffold type to which that cluster is most homologous. Black bars represent known DNA alkylators or DNA interacting metabolites, and hashed bars represent potential DNA-damaging metabolites. Lowercase letters to the right of the bars correspond to structures shown in panel D. (D) Representative compounds corresponding to BGC types in panel C. Potential reactive sites are colored red. LL-D4919α1 and hedamycin structures are shown in Fig. 3. (E and F) Nearest-neighbor analysis of AZL (E) and YQL (F). (E) Nearest genes to AZL proteins found inside and outside clusters, shown as the ratio of GO terms inside and outside and grouped by function (blue, metabolic; green, cell signaling and function; orange, genome maintenance). (F) Representative example from Streptomyces griseoviridis of nearest neighbor analysis for YQL proteins. Genes are colored according to function as in panel E (gray, unknown/hypothetical gene). These genes are invariant for all YQL proteins, with the exception of the outermost genes, in which only one instance of variance was observed. Proximity of HTH_42 proteins to biosynthetic gene clusters. Results from BGC proximity analysis organized by AZL and YQL protein distances to the nearest antiSMASH-predicted cluster in the species’ genome. Nearest cluster upstream [5′/(−)] and/or downstream [3′/(+)] is recorded with the cluster ID, and the most related cluster BLAST hit is denoted with the percent gene similarity. No BGC identified denotes the cluster BLAST could not find a similar cluster which compares to the hit by homology. Download Table S2, XLSX file, 0.06 MB. We found that AZL proteins are particularly enriched in uncharacterized Streptomyces BGCs, with 68 homologs localizing within a variety of different types of clusters (Fig. 2C and D and Table S3). Almost half (n = 32; 47%) localize to clusters resembling those producing known DNA-damaging agents, including AZB (n = 5), LL-D4919α1 (LLD, n = 6), HED (n = 4), ficellomycin/vazabitide A (n = 5), and C-1027/leinamycin (n = 2) (12, 16–18, 40, 41). In addition, several other clusters are related to potential DNA-damaging agents on the basis of a reactive epoxide functional group in the natural product, including angucycline-like molecules (n = 4) herboxidiene and asukamycin. The remaining 10 uncharacterized BGCs are related to clusters that produce macrolides/terpenes, tambromycin-like compounds, and various RiPPs/depsipeptides (Fig. 2C and D). AZL proteins found in characterized and uncharacterized biosynthetic gene clusters. %I/S to AlkZ (column C) is the percent identity or similarity to S. sahachiroi AlkZ. Cluster BLAST (column E) is the most similar BGC as determined by cluster BLAST analysis (% similarity is the percentage of genes in uncharacterized BGC that have homology to genes in the known similar BGC). Download Table S3, XLSX file, 0.01 MB. Bacterial genes of similar function or in a particular pathway are frequently clustered into neighborhoods or operons within the genome; thus, we investigated the nearest neighbors of Streptomyces YQL and AZL genes. We collected gene ontology (GO) terms describing the biological functions of the five nearest neighbors on either side of 40 YQL genes, 40 AZL genes inside BGCs, and 40 AZL genes outside BGCs, which collectively represent ∼15% of the total of all homologs. Biological processes were grouped into three categories: metabolism, signaling/cell function, and genetic information processing. Several key differences were found between the neighborhoods of AZL genes inside versus outside clusters (Fig. 2E and Fig. S2). AZL genes within BGCs were more often found near terpenoid/polyketide/nonribosomal protein synthesis and resistance/defense genes. The defense genes fell into several types: ABC transporters/permeases, α/β-fold hydrolases (VOC resistance proteins), DinB DNA-damage inducible hydrolases, and other AZL proteins. For those AZL genes found outside BGCs, there is an abundance of neighbors involved in cell wall biosynthesis, cell cycle control, and signal transduction. In contrast, there were no significant differences between AZL neighbors involved in processing genetic information inside versus outside clusters (Fig. 2E). In contrast to the variation in the function of AZL gene neighbors, the functions of YQL neighbors (outside clusters) are nearly invariant and are composed of a variety of different gene types with no apparent functional connection between them (Fig. 2F). The functions of many of these neighbors have not been elucidated in Streptomyces, but some are homologous to N-acetyltransferase, a two-component transcription factor/histidine kinase, and a DNA helicase (ComF) involved in transformation competence. Thus, both the sequences and the genomic neighborhoods of YQL proteins are relatively conserved and always found outside of BGCs, in contrast to the more variable copy number, sequence, and neighborhood of AZL genes prevalent within BGCs. Nearest neighbor analysis of AZL proteins. Gene ontology (GO) analysis for AZL nearest neighbors (±5 open reading frames) inside (A) and outside (B) BGCs. Venn diagrams depict the number of neighbors involved in metabolism (blue), signaling and cell function (green), and processing of genetic information (orange). The boxes represent subdivisions of each of the three functions, colored with respect to the key below. Uncharacterized/hypothetical proteins (40 inside, 90 outside) that could not be identified by homology are not included in these data. Full GO term analysis can be found in Tables S5 to S7. Download FIG S2, EPS file, 0.9 MB. Characterized BGCs containing AZL proteins. With the discovery that a significant proportion of AZL proteins reside within BGCs, we took a closer look at the nine characterized BGCs identified to contain an AlkZ homolog in the MIBiG database (Table S3). Four of these produce known DNA-alkylating agents (Fig. 3A), which contain reactive epoxide moieties like AZB that are scaffolded on diverse natural product backbones (Fig. 3A). Whereas AZB is a bifunctional alkylating agent, HED, trioxacarcin A (TXNA), and LL-D49194α1 (LLD) are monofunctional alkylating agents that react with nitrogen N 7 of guanine in specific nucleotide sequences via their epoxide rings and also intercalate the DNA helix via their planar ring systems (12, 42). TXNA and LLD clusters each contain two AlkZ paralogs (TxnU2/U4 and LldU1/U5), whereas the HED cluster contains one (HedH4) that resides between the two polyketide synthase genes. FIG 3AZL proteins found in characterized Streptomyces biosynthetic gene clusters. (A and B) Gene diagrams for AZL-containing BGCs producing DNA alkylating agents (A) and compounds not known to alkylate DNA (B). Gene names are labeled below the cluster diagrams. The biosynthetic scaffold produced by specific genes in the cluster is shaded gray and labeled above the respective genes. NRPS, nonribosomal peptide synthetase; PKS1/PKS2, type 1/2 polyketide synthase; (PKS), PKS-like. Chemical structures of the metabolites produced by each cluster are shown at the bottom of each panel. AZL proteins found in characterized Streptomyces biosynthetic gene clusters. (A and B) Gene diagrams for AZL-containing BGCs producing DNA alkylating agents (A) and compounds not known to alkylate DNA (B). Gene names are labeled below the cluster diagrams. The biosynthetic scaffold produced by specific genes in the cluster is shaded gray and labeled above the respective genes. NRPS, nonribosomal peptide synthetase; PKS1/PKS2, type 1/2 polyketide synthase; (PKS), PKS-like. Chemical structures of the metabolites produced by each cluster are shown at the bottom of each panel. The remaining five AZL-containing clusters in MIBiG produce compounds that are not known to alkylate DNA but that share some structural characteristics with the alkylating agents described above (Fig. 3B). Aclacinomycin contains an anthracycline core surrounded by sugars that allow it to intercalate into DNA and act as a topoisomerase I poison, potentially generating downstream DNA damage (43). Asukamycin contains a modified PKS scaffold and an electrophilic epoxide ring and has been shown to act as both a farsenyltransferase inhibitor and a molecular glue between the UBR7 E3 ubiquitin ligase and the TP53 tumor suppressor, leading to cell death (44, 45). Armeniaspirol contains a unique chlorinated pyrrole and inhibits the AAA+ proteases ClpXP and ClpYQ, leading to cell division arrest in Gram-positive bacteria (46). The other two BGCs produce compounds of known structure but unknown function. Tambromycin and JBIR-34/35 are similar NRPS compounds containing densely substituted chlorinated indole and methyloxazoline moieties (47). The presence of AZL proteins in these clusters suggests that these compounds are genotoxins or otherwise react with DNA and/or that these particular AZL homologs have a function outside DNA repair. The AZL protein within the HED BGC is a DNA glycosylase specific for HED-DNA lesions and provides cellular resistance to HED toxicity. The alkZ gene embedded within the AZB BGC provides exquisite resistance to the potent cytotoxicity of this natural product (27, 28). To determine if AlkZ homologs other than those in the AZB BGC provide self-resistance to their cognate natural products, we characterized the DNA glycosylase and cellular resistance activities of HedH4 for HED-DNA adducts. HED is a potent antibiotic/antitumor agent that induces a strong DNA damage response (48). The bisepoxide side chain alkylates the N7 position of guanines in 5′-(C/T)G sequences (Fig. 4A), the highly oxidized aromatic polyketide intercalates the DNA helix, and two C-glycosidic linked aminosugars interact with the minor groove (12). We generated site-specifically labeled HED-guanosine adducts in DNA by reacting purified compound with an oligonucleotide containing a HED target sequence, d(TGTA). The HED-DNA adduct was stable relative to other N7-alkylguanine lesions as judged by thermal depurination (Fig. S3B) (31, 49). We first assessed the ability of purified HedH4 to hydrolyze HED-DNA using a gel-based glycosylase assay that monitors alkaline cleavage of the AP site product (30, 31). Reaction of HedH4 with HED-DNA followed by hydroxide work-up resulted in β- and δ-elimination products, consistent with production of an AP site from DNA glycosylase-mediated excision of the N-glycosidic bond of the HED-guanosine nucleotide (Fig. 4A and B). We verified the identity of the excision product as HED-guanine by high-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS) (Fig. 4C). To verify that the HED-guanine product was not generated by a contaminating enzyme and to examine the conservation of the catalytic QΦQ motif, we purified alanine mutants of the two glutamine residues and tested their activity under single-turnover conditions (Fig. 4D and Fig. S3A and C). The calculated rate constant (kcat) for wild-type HedH4 was at least 7.8 ± 0.5 min−1 (the reaction was complete at the earliest time point). Relative to the wild type, the Q41A mutant was at least 225-fold slower (kcat = 0.04 ± 0.01 min−1) and the Q43A mutant at least 10-fold slower (kcat = 0.8 ± 0.2 min−1), indicating that both Gln residues in the HedH4 QΦQ play a role in HED-guanine excision. FIG 4HedH4 excises hedamycin-guanine adducts from DNA and provides cellular resistance to hedamycin toxicity. (A) HED modification of deoxyguanosine in DNA forms a HED-DNA adduct that is hydrolyzed by HedH4 to generate an abasic (AP) site in the DNA and free HED-guanine. The reactions within the dashed line are not catalyzed by HedH4. The AP nucleotide is susceptible to base-catalyzed nicking to form shorter DNA products containing either a 3′-phospho-α,β-unsaturated aldehyde (PUA; β-elimination) or a 3′-phosphate (δ-elimination). The asterisk denotes the original 5′-end of the DNA. (B) Denaturing PAGE of 5′-Cy5-labeled HED-DNA substrate and β- and δ-elimination products after treatment with enzyme or buffer (mock) for 1 h, followed by NaOH to nick the AP site. The HED-DNA reaction only goes to ∼50% completion under our reaction conditions, as shown by the two bands of equal intensity in the mock reaction. (C) HPLC-MS analysis of HED (blue) and the HED-guanine excision product from reaction of HedH4 and HED-DNA (red). Axis represents elution time (x–axis) versus relative abundance from total ion count (y–axis). Insets show mass spectra of each elution peak. (D) Wild-type and mutant HedH4 glycosylase activity for HED-DNA. Spontaneous depurination from a no-enzyme reaction (mock) is shown as a negative control. Data are means ± standard deviations (SD) (n = 3). Curves were fit to a single exponential. Representative data are shown in Fig. S3C. (E) Denaturing PAGE of HED-DNA adducts after 1 h of incubation with either buffer (mock) or bacterial alkylpurine-DNA glycosylases. (F) Denaturing PAGE of 1-h reaction products of E. coli YcaQ and HedH4 with 7mG-DNA (left) and S. bottropensis TxnU4 and HedH4 with TXNA-DNA (right). (G) Structure of NM8-ICL. (H) Denaturing PAGE of AZB-ICL unhooking by S. sahachiroi AlkZ and HedH4 (left) and NM8-ICL unhooking by E. coli YcaQ and HedH4 (right). Reactions were treated with buffer (mock) or enzyme for 1 h, followed by alkaline hydrolysis. MA, monoadduct. (I) HED inhibition of E. coli K-12 transformed with hedH4/pSF-OXB1 (constitutively expressed) or empty vector pSF-OXB1. The lag time is defined as the time elapsed before cells start to grow exponentially. Data are means ± SD (n = 3). Growth curves are shown in Fig. S3F and G. Significance values were determined by unpaired t test of the mean lag time values (*, 0.05 ≤ P ≤ 0.01; ***, 0.001 ≤ P ≤ 0.0001). (J) Colony dilution assay for E. coli strains with or without HedH4 exposed to increasing concentrations of HED for 1 h. Surviving fraction (%) is relative to untreated cells. Values are means ± SD (n = 3). Significance values were determined by unpaired t test of the mean sensitivity values (*, 0.05 ≤ P ≤ 0.01; **, 0.01 ≤ P ≤ 0.001). HedH4 excises hedamycin-guanine adducts from DNA and provides cellular resistance to hedamycin toxicity. (A) HED modification of deoxyguanosine in DNA forms a HED-DNA adduct that is hydrolyzed by HedH4 to generate an abasic (AP) site in the DNA and free HED-guanine. The reactions within the dashed line are not catalyzed by HedH4. The AP nucleotide is susceptible to base-catalyzed nicking to form shorter DNA products containing either a 3′-phospho-α,β-unsaturated aldehyde (PUA; β-elimination) or a 3′-phosphate (δ-elimination). The asterisk denotes the original 5′-end of the DNA. (B) Denaturing PAGE of 5′-Cy5-labeled HED-DNA substrate and β- and δ-elimination products after treatment with enzyme or buffer (mock) for 1 h, followed by NaOH to nick the AP site. The HED-DNA reaction only goes to ∼50% completion under our reaction conditions, as shown by the two bands of equal intensity in the mock reaction. (C) HPLC-MS analysis of HED (blue) and the HED-guanine excision product from reaction of HedH4 and HED-DNA (red). Axis represents elution time (x–axis) versus relative abundance from total ion count (y–axis). Insets show mass spectra of each elution peak. (D) Wild-type and mutant HedH4 glycosylase activity for HED-DNA. Spontaneous depurination from a no-enzyme reaction (mock) is shown as a negative control. Data are means ± standard deviations (SD) (n = 3). Curves were fit to a single exponential. Representative data are shown in Fig. S3C. (E) Denaturing PAGE of HED-DNA adducts after 1 h of incubation with either buffer (mock) or bacterial alkylpurine-DNA glycosylases. (F) Denaturing PAGE of 1-h reaction products of E. coli YcaQ and HedH4 with 7mG-DNA (left) and S. bottropensis TxnU4 and HedH4 with TXNA-DNA (right). (G) Structure of NM8-ICL. (H) Denaturing PAGE of AZB-ICL unhooking by S. sahachiroi AlkZ and HedH4 (left) and NM8-ICL unhooking by E. coli YcaQ and HedH4 (right). Reactions were treated with buffer (mock) or enzyme for 1 h, followed by alkaline hydrolysis. MA, monoadduct. (I) HED inhibition of E. coli K-12 transformed with hedH4/pSF-OXB1 (constitutively expressed) or empty vector pSF-OXB1. The lag time is defined as the time elapsed before cells start to grow exponentially. Data are means ± SD (n = 3). Growth curves are shown in Fig. S3F and G. Significance values were determined by unpaired t test of the mean lag time values (*, 0.05 ≤ P ≤ 0.01; ***, 0.001 ≤ P ≤ 0.0001). (J) Colony dilution assay for E. coli strains with or without HedH4 exposed to increasing concentrations of HED for 1 h. Surviving fraction (%) is relative to untreated cells. Values are means ± SD (n = 3). Significance values were determined by unpaired t test of the mean sensitivity values (*, 0.05 ≤ P ≤ 0.01; **, 0.01 ≤ P ≤ 0.001). HedH4 biochemistry and cellular resistance. (A) Coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE of purified HedH4, S. sahachiroi AlkZ, and E. coli YcaQ proteins. MW, molecular weight standards. Calculated protein molecular weights are 40.8 kDa (HedH4), 41.2 kDa (AlkZ), and 47.7 kDa (YcaQ). (B) Thermal and enzyme-catalyzed depurination of HED-DNA adducts. Denaturing PAGE of 5′-Cy5-labeled HED-DNA oligodeoxynucleotide substrate and β- and δ-elimination products formed from hydroxide treatment of the abasic site generated from hydrolysis of the HED-deoxyguanosine N-glycosidic bond. Formation of HED-DNA goes to ∼50% completion under our reaction conditions. Lane 1, HED-DNA; lanes 2 and 3, HED-DNA heated to 95°C for 5 min followed by treatment with either water or NaOH; lanes 4 and 5, HED-DNA treated with either buffer (mock) or 1 μM HedH4 for 1 h at 25°C, followed by NaOH. (C) Denaturing PAGE of hedamycin excision by HedH4 wild-type and catalytic mutants Q41A and Q43A. Mock, reaction with buffer alone. Quantification of this gel and the replicates are in Fig. 4D. (D and E) Verification of HedH4 cloning. (D) Agarose gel (1%) of analytical restriction digest of empty pSF-OXB1 and HedH4/pSF-OXB1 using NcoI-HF and XbaI restriction enzymes. Calculated molecular weights for pSF-OXB1 and HedH4 are 3.9 kb and 1.1 kb, respectively. (E) Agarose gel (1%) of colony PCR of HedH4 transformants in E. coli using the HedH4 NcoI and XbaI primers (Table S4). Wild-type E. coli K-12 served as the negative control, while the protein expression vector HedH4/pBG102 served as a positive control. (F and G) Growth curves for WT E. coli K-12 containing either pSF-OXB1 (F) or HedH4/pSF-OXB1 (G) grown in LB/Kan medium supplemented with increasing concentrations of hedamycin. Values are means ± SD (n = 3). Download FIG S3, EPS file, 2.7 MB. We probed specificity of HedH4 for HED-DNA adducts, first by asking whether the HED-guanosine lesion was a substrate for other bacterial alkylpurine DNA glycosylases with various specificities. E. coli AlkA and YcaQ and Bacillus cereus AlkC and AlkD excise a relatively broad range of alkyl-DNA adducts (31, 50–55). S. sahachiroi AlkZ, S. bottropensis TxnU2 and TxnU4, and S. vinaceusdrappus LldU1 and LldU5, like HedH4, are found in BGCs that produce bulky N7-alkyl- and intercalating DNA adducts (Fig. 3A), and each is specific for their cognate toxin (31, 56). Compared to HedH4, which excises 100% of the HED-guanine from DNA, none of the 10 alkylpurine DNA glycosylases tested showed any appreciable activity for HED-DNA after 1 h (Fig. 4E). Thus, the HED-DNA adduct is hydrolyzed only by the glycosylase found in the HED BGC. We next examined the ability of HedH4 to excise N7-alkylpurine lesions that act as substrates for other YQL and AZL enzymes. Interestingly, HedH4 showed no significant activity for the simple methyl adduct 7mG, which is removed by most alkylpurine DNA glycosylases, including E. coli YcaQ and S. sahachiroi AlkZ (Fig. 4F). HedH4 was also unable to hydrolyze TXNA-guanosine, a substrate for TxnU4 from the TXNA BGC (Fig. 4F) (56). We also tested the ability of HedH4 to unhook ICLs derived from AZB (Fig. 1A) and an 8-atom nitrogen mustard, NM8 (Fig. 4G), which are substrates for S. sahachiroi AlkZ and E. coli YcaQ, respectively. Compared to AlkZ and YcaQ, HedH4 showed little to no activity for either ICL. Thus, HedH4 is highly specific for DNA adducts derived from its cognate natural product. We next tested if the hedH4 gene provides heterologous resistance to HED cytotoxicity in cells. E. coli transformed with either vector containing hedH4 constitutively expressed at low levels or vector alone were grown in the presence of increasing amounts of HED (Fig. S3D to G). HedH4 provided modest protection against HED, as cells expressing HedH4 grew to a higher density at all HED concentrations (Fig. 4I and Fig. S3F and G) and had a higher 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) than cells treated with vector alone (HedH4, 5.9 μM ± 0.7; vector, 3.9 μM ± 0.4). The sensitivity differences between HedH4 and the vector control were more pronounced from a colony dilution assay performed under log-phase growth conditions (Fig. 4J). Cells expressing empty vector displayed an IC50 value of 11.1 ± 1.5 μM, while cells expressing HedH4 displayed a 4-fold reduction in sensitivity to HED (48.1 ± 13.8 μM). These results indicate that HedH4 is a DNA glycosylase specific for HED-DNA adducts and provides resistance to cells exposed to the antibiotic. YQL proteins from Actinobacteria hydrolyze simple N7-alkylguanosine lesions and interstrand cross-links. We previously characterized E. coli YcaQ to have robust activity toward 7mG and NM-ICLs (Fig. 1B and 4G), a substrate preference distinct from AZB- and HED-specific S. sahachiroi AlkZ and HedH4 (Fig. 4F and H) (31). We therefore were interested in determining if other proteins of the YQL subfamily were functional YcaQ orthologs. We purified YQL proteins from the Actinobacteria Thermomonospora curvata and Thermobifida fusca and tested their ability to hydrolyze 7mG and unhook NM8-ICLs (Fig. 5). Both proteins showed significant activity for both substrates, providing evidence that the YQL subfamily in general has comparable specificity for simple N7-alkylguanine lesions, distinguishing it biochemically from the AZL subfamily. FIG 5YQL proteins from Actinobacteria hydrolyze simple N7-alkylguanosine lesions and interstrand cross-links. (A and B) Denaturing PAGE of reaction products of E. coli YcaQ (Eco) and YQL proteins from Thermomonospora curvata (Tcu) and Thermobifida fusca (Tfu) with 7mG-DNA (A) and NM8-ICL (B) after 5 min and 1 h. Lane 1 of each gel is a no-enzyme control. YQL proteins from Actinobacteria hydrolyze simple N7-alkylguanosine lesions and interstrand cross-links. (A and B) Denaturing PAGE of reaction products of E. coli YcaQ (Eco) and YQL proteins from Thermomonospora curvata (Tcu) and Thermobifida fusca (Tfu) with 7mG-DNA (A) and NM8-ICL (B) after 5 min and 1 h. Lane 1 of each gel is a no-enzyme control.